THE EIGHTY-SEVENTH SURAH
AL-A'LA (THE ALL-HIGHEST)

1	I.e., He endows it with inner coherence and with qualities consistent with the functions which it is meant to perform, and thus adapts it a priori to the exigencies of its existence.
2	Cf. the last sentence of {25:2} and the corresponding note [3]; also {20:50} and note [31].
3	I.e., metonymically, "who brings forth life and deals death".
4	The classical commentators assume that the above words are addressed specifically to the Prophet, and that, therefore, they relate to his being taught the Qur'an and being promised that he would not forget anything thereof, "save what God may will [thee to forget]". This last clause has ever since given much trouble to the commentators, inasmuch as it is not very plausible that He who has revealed the Qur'an to the Prophet should cause him to forget anything of it. Hence, many unconvincing explanations have been advanced from very early times down to our own days, the least convincing being that last refuge of every perplexed Quran-commentator, the "doctrine of abrogation" (refuted in my note [87] on {2:106}). However, the supposed difficulty of interpretation disappears as soon as we allow ourselves to realize that the above passage, though ostensibly addressed to the Prophet, is directed at man in general, and that it is closely related to an earlier Quranic revelation - namely, the first five verses of surah {96} ("The Germ-Cell") and, in particular, verses {3-5}, which speak of God's having "taught man what he did not know". In note [3] on those verses I have expressed the opinion that they allude to mankind's cumulative acquisition of empirical and rational knowledge, handed down from generation to generation and from one civilization to another: and it is to this very phenomenon that the present passage, too, refers. We are told here that God, who has formed man in accordance with what he is meant to be and has promised to guide him, will enable him to acquire (and thus, as it were, "impart" to him) elements of knowledge which mankind will accumulate, record and collectively "remember" - except what God may cause man to "forget" (in another word, to abandon) as having become redundant by virtue of his new experiences and his acquisition of wider, more differentiated elements of knowledge, empirical as well as deductive or speculative, including more advanced, empirically acquired skills. However, the very next sentence makes it clear that all knowledge arrived at through our observation of the external world and through speculation, though necessary and most valuable, is definitely limited in scope and does not, therefore, in itself suffice to give us an insight into ultimate truths.
5	I.e., all that is intrinsically beyond the reach of human perception (al-ghayb): the implication being that, since human knowledge must forever remain imperfect, man cannot really find his way through life without the aid of divine revelation.
6	I.e., towards an ease of the mind and peace of the spirit.
7	Thus Baghawi, as well as Razi in one of his alternative interpretations of this phrase.
8	I.e., in consequence of having remained aloof from the divine reminder. (Cf. {74:2-29}.)
9	These two names are given here only as examples of earlier prophetic revelations, thus stressing, once again, the twofold fact of continuity in mankind's religious experiences and of the identity of the basic truths preached by all the prophets. (Cf. also {53:36} ff.) The noun suhuf (sing. sahifah), which literally denotes "leaves [of a book]" or "scrolls", is synonymous with kitab in all the senses of this term (Jawhari): hence, in the above context, "revelations".
