SURAH 21
AL-ANBIYA' (THE PROPHETS)

1	Lit., "and yet in [their] heedlessness they are obstinate (mu'ridun)".
2	Lit., "while they are playing".
3	See next note.
4	As regards my occasional rendering of sihr (lit., "sorcery" or "magic") as "spellbinding eloquence", see {74:24}, where this term occurs for the first time in the chronology of Qur'anic revelation. - By rejecting the message of the Qur'an on the specious plea that Muhammad is but a human being endowed with "spellbinding eloquence", the opponents of the Qur'anic doctrine in reality "conceal their innermost thoughts": for, their rejection is due not so much to any pertinent criticism of this doctrine as, rather, to their instinctive, deep-set unwillingness to submit to the moral and spiritual discipline which an acceptance of the Prophet's call would entail.
5	According to the earliest scholars of Medina and Basrah, as well as some of the scholars of Kufah, this word is spelt qul, as an imperative ("Say"), whereas some of the Meccan scholars and the majority of those of Kufah read it as aala ("He [i.e., the Prophet] said"). In the earliest copies of the Qur'an the spelling was apparently confined, in this instance, to the consonants q-l: hence the possibility of reading it either as qul or as qala. However, as Tabari points out, both these readings have the same meaning and are, therefore, equally valid, "for, when God bade Muhammad to say this, he [undoubtedly] said it....Hence, in whichever way this word is read, the reader is correct (musib as-sawab) in his reading." Among the classical commentators, Baghawi and Baydawi explicitly use the spelling qul, while Zamakhshari's short remark that "it has also been read as qala" seems to indicate his own preference for the imperative qul.
6	Lit., "confusing medleys (adghath) of dreams".
7	Lit., "before them".
8	The downfall of those communities of old - frequently referred to in the Qur'an - was invariably due to the fact that they had been resolved to ignore all spiritual truths which militated against their own, materialistic concept of life: is it, then (so the Qur'anic argument goes), reasonable to expect that the opponents of the Prophet Muhammad, who are similarly motivated, would be more willing to consider his message on its merits?
9	Lit., "followers of the reminder"-i.e., of the Bible, which in its original, uncorrupted form represented one of God's "reminders" to man.
10	Lit., "neither did We fashion them [i.e., those apostles] as bodies that ate no food", implying a denial of any supernatural quality in the prophets entrusted with God's message (cf. {5:75}, {13:38} and {25:20}, as well as the corresponding notes). The above is an answer to the unbelievers' objection to Muhammad's prophethood expressed in verse {3} of this surah.
11	I.e., their believing followers.
12	As regards my rendering of al-musrifun as "those who had wasted their own selves", see note [21] on the last sentence of {10: 12}.
13	The term dhikr, which primarily denotes a "reminder" or a "remembrance", or, as Raghib defines it, the "presence [of something] in the mind", has also the meaning of "that by which one is remembered", i.e., with praise - in other words, "renown" or "fame" - and, tropically, "honour", "eminence" or "dignity". Hence, the above phrase contains, apart from the concept of a "reminder", an indirect allusion to the dignity and happiness to which man may attain by following the spiritual and social precepts laid down in the Qur'an. By rendering the expression dhikrukum as "all that you ought to bear in mind", I have tried to bring out all these meanings.
14	Lit., "after it".
15	For an explanation of the phrase ma utriftum fihi, see surah {11}, note [147].
16	The Qur'an does not say whose words these are, but the tenor of this passage indicates, I believe, that it is the scornful, self-accusing voice of the sinnirs' own conscience: hence my interpolation, between brackets, at the beginning of this verse.
17	Lit., "They said".
18	Lit., "playing" or "playfully", i.e., without meaning and purpose: see note [11] on {10:5}.
19	Lit., "if We had [ever] willed to do so": meaning that, had God ever willed to "indulge in a pastime" (which, being almighty and self-sufficient, He has no need to do), He could have found it within His Own Self, without any necessity to create a universe which would embody His hypothetical - and logically inconceivable - will to "please Himself", and would thus represent a "projection", as it were, of His Own Being. In the elliptic manner of the Qur'an, the above passage amounts to a statement of God's transcendence.
20	I.e., the truth of God's transcendence against the false idea of His existential immanence in, or co-existence with, the created universe.
21	The obvious fact that everything in the created universe is finite and perishable effectively refutes the claim that it could be a "projection" of the Creator, who is infinite and eternal.
22	Lit.. "for all that you attribute to God bv way of description" or "of definition" (cf. the last sentence of 6:100 and the corresponding note 88) - implying that the idea of God's "immanence" in His creation is equivalent to an attempt to define His Being.
23	According to the classical commentators, this refers to the angels; but it is possible to understand the expression "those who are with Him" in a wider sense, comprising not only the angels but also all human beings who are truly God-conscious and wholly dedicated to Him. In either case, their "being with Him" is a metaphorical indication of their spiritual eminence and place of honour in God's sight, and does not bear any spatial connotation of "nearness" (Zamakhshari and Razl): obviously so, because God is limitless in space as well as in time. (See also {40:7} and the corresponding note [4].)
24	As stressed by Zamakhshari, the particle am which introduces this sentence has not, as is so often the case, an interrogative sense ("is it that..."), but is used here in the sense of bal, which in this instance may be rendered as "and yet".
25	Lit., "they have taken unto themselves deities from the earth", i.e., from among the things or beings found on earth: an expression which alludes to all manner of false objects of worship - idols of every description, forces of nature, deified human beings. and. finally, abstract concepts such as wealth, power, etc.
26	Lit., "in those two [realms]", alluding to the first clause of verse {19} above.
27	Lit., "the Sustainer (rabb) of the awesome throne of almightiness". (For this rendering of al-'arsh, see note [43] on {7:54}.
28	Cf. last sentence of verse {18} and the corresponding note [22], as well as note [88] on {6 :100}.
29	See note [24] above.
30	Lit., "produce your evidence", i.e., for the existence of deities other than God, as well as for the intellectual and moral justification of worshipping anything but Him.
31	I.e., the earlier prophets, the purport of whose messages was always the stress on the oneness of God.
32	In other words, most people's obstinate refusal to consider a reasonable proposition on its merits is often due to no more than the simple fact that it is not familiar to them.
33	I.e., utterly remote from the imperfection implied in the concept of "offspring": see note [77] on {19:92}.
34	This alludes to prophets like Jesus, whom the Christians regard as "the son of God", as well as to the angels, whom the pre-Islamic Arabs considered to be "God's daughters" (since they were conceived of as females).
35	Lit., "they do not precede Him in speech" - meaning that they proclaim only what He has revealed to them and bidden them to proclaim.
36	See note [247] on {2:255}.
37	Cf. {19:87} and {20:109}. Regarding the problem of "intercession" as such, see note [7] on {10:3}.
38	It is, as a rule, futile to make an explanation of the Qur'an dependent on "scientific findings" which may appear true today, but may equally well be disproved tomorrow by new findings. Nevertheless, the above unmistakable reference to the unitary origin of the universe - metonymically described in the Qur'an as "the heavens and the earth" - strikingly anticipates the view of almost all modern astrophysicists that this universe has originated as one entity from one single element, namely, hydrogen, which became subsequently consolidated through gravity and then separated into individual nebulae, galaxies and solar systems, with further individual parts progressively breaking away to form new entities in the shape of stars, planets and the latters' satellites. (Regarding the Qur'anic reference to the phenomenon described by the trem "expanding universe", see {51:47} and the correesponding note [31].)
39	The statement that God "made out of water every living thing" expresses most concisely a truth that is nowadays universally accepted by science. It has a threefold meaning: (1) Water - and, specifically, the sea - was the environment within which the prototype of all living matter originated; (2) among all the innumerable-existing or conceivable-liquids, only water has the peculiar properties necessary for the emergence and development of life; and (3) the protoplasm, which is the physical basis of every living cell -whether in plants or in animals- and represents the only form of matter in which the phenomenon of life are manifested, consists overwhelmingly of water and is, thus, utterly dependent on it.  read together with the preceding statement, which alludes to the unitary origin of the physical universe, the emrgence of life from and within equally unitary element points to the existence of a unitary plan underlying all creation and, hence, to the xistence and oneness of the Creator.  this accent on the oneness of God and the unity of His creation is taken up again in verse {92} below.
40	See {16:15} and the corresponding note [11].
41	See note [4] on the first sentence of {13:2}, which seems to have a similar meaning.
42	This relates to the objection of the unbelievers, mentioned in verse {3} of this surah, that Muhammad is "but a mortal like yourselves", and connects also with verses {7-8}, which stress that all of God's apostles were but mortal men (cf. {3: 144}).
43	The obvious implication is, "and so We shall not grant it unto thee, either". Cf. {39: 30}-"thou art bound to die".
44	Lit., "but if, then, thou shouldst die, will they live forever?"-implying an assumption on their part that they would not be called to account on death and resurrection.
45	Lit., "you shall be brought back", i.e., for judgment.
46	Lit., "see thee": but since this verb has here obviously an abstract meaning, relating to the message propounded by the Prophet, it is best rendered as above.
47	Sc., "and dares to deny their reality although he is a mere mortal like ourselves?"
48	I.e., although they resent any aspersion cast on whatever things or forces they unthinkingly worship, they refuse to acknowledge God's planning will manifested in every aspect of His creation.
49	Lit., "is created out of haste" - i.e., he is by nature imbued with impatience: cf. last sentence of {17:11}. In the present context this refers to man's impatience regarding things to come: in this case - as is obvious from the sequence - his hasty refusal to believe in God's coming judgement.
50	Cf. {16: 1} -"God's judgment is [bound to] come: do not, then, call for its speedy advent!"
51	The Qur'anic answer to this question is given in {7:187}.
52	See {6:10} (which has exactly the same wording) and the corresponding note [9].
53	The reference to God, in this context, as "the Most Gracious" (ar-rahman) is meant to bring out the fact that He - and He alone - is the protector of all creation.
54	Lit., "until their lives ('umur) grew long"-i.e., until they grew accustomed to the thought that their prosperity would last forever (Zamakhshari).
55	For an explanation, see the identical phrase in {13:41} and the corresponding notes [79] and [80].
56	Lit., "whenever they are warned".
57	See note [38] on {2:53}. The reference to the revelation bestowed on the earlier prophets as “the standard by which to discern the true from the false” (al-furqan) has here a twofold implication: firstly, it alludes to the Qur’anic doctrine — explained in note [5] on {2:4} — of the historical continuity in all divine revelation, and, secondly, it stresses the fact that revelation — and revelation alone — provides an absolute criterion of all moral valuation. Since the Mosaic dispensation as such was binding on the children of Israel alone and remained valid only within a particular historical and cultural context, the term al-furqan relates here not to the Mosaic Law as such, but to the fundamental ethical truths contained in the Torah and common to all divine revelations.
58	For an explanation of the above rendering of the expression bi’l-ghayb, see note [3] on {2:3}.
59	The possessive pronoun "his" affixed to the noun rushd (which, in this context, has the meaning of "consciousness of what is right") emphasizes the highly personal, intellectual quality of Abraham's progressive realization of God's almightiness and uniqueness (cf. {6:74-79} as well as note [69] on {6:83}); while the expression min qabl -rendered by me as "long before [the time of Moses]" - stresses, once again, the element of continuity in man's religious insight and experience.
60	Sc., "for an explanation of what had happened".
61	Lit., "they turned to [or "upon"] themselves", i.e., blaming one another.
62	I.e., "you are doing wrong to Abraham by rashly suspecting him" (Tabari).
63	Lit., "they were turned upside down upon their heads": an idiomatic phrase denoting a "mental somersault" - in this case, a sudden reversal of their readiness to exonerate Abraham and a return to their former suspicion.
64	Nowhere does the Qur'an state that Abraham was actually, bodily thrown into the fire and miraculously kept alive in it: on the contrary, the phrase "God saved him from the fire" occurring in {29:24} points, rather, to the fact of his not having been thrown into it. On the other hand, the many elaborate (and conflicting) stories with which the classical commentators have embroidered their interpretation of the above verse can invariably be traced back to Talmudic legends and may, therefore, be disregarded. What the Qur'an gives us here, as well as in {29:24} and {37:97}, is apparently an allegorical allusion to the fire of persecution which Abraham had to suffer and which, by dint of its intensity, was to become in his later life a source of spiritual strength and inner peace (salam). Regarding the deeper implications of the term salam, see note [29] on {5:16}.
65	Inasmuch as Abraham forsook - as shown in the next verse - his homeland, and thus abandoned his people to their spiritual ignorance.
66	Lit., "for all the worlds" or "for all people": i.e., Palestine, which subsequently became the homeland of a long line of prophets. (Abraham's native place - and the scene of his early struggles against polytheism - was Ur in Mesopotamia.)
67	I.e., in addition (nafilatan) to his eldest son Ishmael (Isma'll) who had been born years before Isaac.
68	For the story of Lot, see {7:80-84}, {11:77-83} and {15:58-76}.
69	I.e., the Deluge. The story of Noah is mentioned several times in the Qur'an, and particularly in {11:25-48}. Regarding the Deluge itself, see surah {7}, note [47].
70	For an elucidation of the story - or, rather, legend - to which the above verse alludes, we must rely exclusively on the Companions of the Prophet, since neither the Qur'an nor any authentic saying of the Prophet speels it out to us. However, the fact that a good many Companions and their immediate successors (tabi'un) fully agreed on the substance of the story, differing only in one or two insignificant details' seems to indicate that at that period it was already well-established in ancient Arabian tradition (cf. note [77] below). According to this story, a flock of sheep strayed at night into a neighbouring field and destroyed its crop.  The case was brought before King David for judicial decision. On finding that the incident was due to the negligence of the owner of the sheep, David awarded the whole flock - the value of which corresponded roughly to the extent of the damage - as an indemnity to the owner of the field.  David's young son, Solomon, regarded this judgement as too severe, inasmuch as the sheep represented the defendant's capital, whereas the damage was of a transitory nature, involving no more than the loss of one year's crop, i.e., of income.  He therefore suggested to his father that the judgement should be altered: the owner of the field should have the temporary possession and usufruct of the sheep (sheep, wool, new-born lambs, etc.), while their owner should tend the damaged field until it was restored to its former productivity, whereupon both the field and the flock of sheep would revert to their erstwhile owners; in this way the plaintiff would be fully compensated for his loss without depriving the defendant of his substance.  David realized taht his son'd solution of the case was better than his own, and passed judgement accordingly; but since he, no less than Solomon, had been inspired by a deep sense of justice, God - in the words of the Qur'an - "bore witness to their judgement".
71	I.e., the fact that Solomon's judgment was more profound did not disprove the intrinsic justice of David's original judgment or deprive it of its merit.
72	Lit., "We compelled".
73	A reference to the Psalms of David, which call upon all nature to extol the glory of God - similar to the Qur'anic verses, "The seven heavens extol His limitless glory, and the earth, and all that they contain" ({17:44}), or "All that is in the heavens and on earth extols God's limitless glory" ({57:1}).
74	The noun labus is synonymous with libas or libs, signifying "a garment" or "garments" (Qamus, Lisan al-'Arab). But since this term has occasionally been used by pre-Islamic Arabs in the sense of "mail" or "coats of mail" (ibid.), the classical commentators assume that it has this meaning in the above context as well; and in this they rely on the - otherwise unsupported - statement of the tabi'i Qatadah to the effect that "David was the first to make chain mail" (Tabari). Accordingly, they understand the term ba's which occurs at the end of the sentence in its secondary sense of "war" or "warlike violence", and interpret the relevant part of the verse thus: "We taught him how to make coats of mail for you, so that they might fortify you against your [mutual acts of] violence", or "against [the effects of] your warlike violence". One should, however, bear in mind that ba's signifies also "harm", "misfortune", "distress", etc., as well as "danger"; hence it denotes, it its widest sense, anything that causes distress or fear (Taj al-'Arus). If we adopt this last meaning, the term labus may be understood in its primary significance of "garment" - in this case, the metaphorical "garment of God-consciousness" (libas at-taqwa) of which the Qur'an speaks in {7:26}. Rendered in this sense, the above verse expresses the idea that the Almighty taught David how to imbue his followers with that deep God-consciousness which frees men from all spiritual distress and all fears, whether it be fear of one another or the subconscious fear of the Unknown. The concluding rhetorical question, "but are you grateful [for this boon]?" implies that, as a rule, man does not fully realize - and, hence, is not really grateful for- the spiritual bounty thus offered him by God.
75	This is apparently an allusion to the fleets of sailing ships which brought untold riches to Palestine (“the land which We had blessed”) and made Solomon’s wealth proverbial.
76	My rendering, in this particular context, of shayatin (lit., "satans") as "rebellious forces" is based on the tropical use of the term shaytan in the sense of anything "rebellious", "inordinately proud" or "insolent" (cf. Lane IV, 1552)-in this case, possibly a reference to subdued and enslaved enemies or, more probably, to "rebellious" forces of nature which Solomon was able to tame and utilize; however, see also next note.
77	In this as well as in several other passages relating to Solomon, the Qur'an alludes to the many poetic legends which were associated with his name since early antiquity and had become part and parcel of Judaeo-Christian and Arabian lore long before the advent of Islam. Although it is undoubtedly possible to interpret such passages in a "rationalistic" manner, I do not think that this is really necessary. Because they were so deeply ingrained in the imagination of the people to whom the Qur'an addressed itself in the first instance, these legendary accounts of Solomon's wisdom and magic powers had acquired a cultural reality of their own and were, therefore, eminently suited to serve as a medium for the parabolic exposition of certain ethical truths with which this book is concerned: and so, without denying or confirming their mythical character, the Qur'an uses them as a foil for the idea that God is the ultimate source of all human power and glory, and that all achievements of human ingenuity, even though they may sometimes border on the miraculous, are but an expression of His transcendental creativity.
78	The story of Job (Ayyub in Arabic), describing his erstwhile happiness and prosperity, his subsequent trials and tribulations, the loss of all his children and his property, his own loathsome illness and utter despair and, finally, God's reward of his patience in adversity, is given in full in the Old Testament (The Book of Job). This Biblical, highly philosophical epic is most probably a Hebrew translation or paraphrase - still evident in the language employed-of an ancient Naba-taean (i.e., North-Arabian) poem, for "Job, the author of the finest piece of poetry that the ancient Semitic world produced, was an Arab, not a Jew, as the form of his name (Iyyob) and the scene of his book, North Arabia, indicate" (Philip K. Hitti, History of the Arabs, London 1937, pp. 42-43). Since God "spoke" to him, Job ranks in the Qur'an among the prophets, personifying the supreme virtue of patience in adversity (sabr).
79	Lit., "his family" - i.e., new children in place of those who had died.
80	See surah {19}, note [41].
81	Lit., "and him of the pledge". The expression dhu 'l-kifl is derived from the verb kafala - and especially the form takaffala - which signifies "he became responsible [for something or someone]" or pledged himself [to do something]". Although the classical commentators consider dhu 'l kifl to be the peithet or the proper name of a particular prophet - whom they variously, more or less at randm, identify with Elijah or Joshua or Zachariah or Ezekiel - I fail to see any reason whatever for such attempts at "identification", the more so since we have not a single authentic hadith which would mention, or even distantly allude to, a prophet by this name.  I am, therefore, of the opinion that we have here (as in the identical expression in {38:48}) a generic term applying to every one of the prophets, inasmuch as each of them pledged himself unreservedly to God and accepted the responsibility for delivering His message to man.
82	I.e., the Prophet Jonah, who is said to have been swallowed by a "great fish", as mentioned in {37: 139} ff. and more fully narrated in the Old Testament (The Book of Jonah).
83	According to the Biblical account (which more or less agrees with the Qur'anic references to his story), Jonah was a prophet sent to the people of Nineveh, the capital of Assyria. At first his preaching was disregarded by his people, and he left them in anger, thus abandoning the mission entrusted to him by God; in the words of the Qur'an ({37: 140}), "he fled like a runaway slave". The allegory of his temporary punishment and his subsequent rescue and redemption is referred to elsewhere in the Qur'an (i.e., in {37:139-148}) and explained in the corresponding notes. It is to that punishment, repentance and salvation that the present and the next verse allude. (The redemption of Jonah's people is mentioned in {10:98} and {37:147-148}.)
84	Lit., "I was among the wrongdoers".
85	Lit., "Thou art the best of inheritors" - a phrase explained in note [22] on {15:23}. The words interpolated by me between brackets correspond to Zamakhshari's and Razi's interpretation of this phrase. For more detailed references to Zachariah, father of John the Baptist, see {3:37} ff. and {19:2} ff.
86	Lit., "for We had made his wife fit for him", i.e., after her previous barrenness.
87	This allegorical expression, used here with reference to Mary's conception of Jesus, has been widely - and erroneously - interpreted as relating specifically to his birth. As a matter of fact, the Qur'an uses the same expression in three other places with reference to the creation of man in general - namely in {15 :29} and {38:72}, "when I have formed him... and breathed into him of My spirit"; and in {32:9}, "and thereupon He forms [lit., "formed"] him fully and breathes [lit., "breathed"] into him of His spirit". In particular, the passage of which the last-quoted phrase is a part (i.e., {32:7-9}) makes it abundantly and explicitly clear that God "breathes of His spirit" into every human being. Commenting on the verse under consideration, Zamakhshari states that "the breathing of the spirit [of God] into a body signifies the endowing it with life": an explanation with which Razi concurs. (In this connection, see also note [181] on {4:171}.) As for the description of Mary as allati ahsanat farjaha, idiomatically denoting "one who guarded her chastity" (lit., "her private parts"), it is to be borne in mind that the term ihsan - lit., "[one's] being fortified [against any danger or evil]" - has the tropical meaning of "abstinence from what is unlawful or reprehensible" (Tarj al-'Arus), and especially from illicit sexual intercourse, and is applied to a man as well as a woman: thus, for instance, the terms muhsan and muhsanah are used elsewhere in the Qur'an to describe, respectively, a man or a woman who is "fortified [by marriage] against unchastity". Hence, the expression allati ahsanat farjaha, occurring in the above verse as well as in {66: 12} with reference to Mary, is but meant to stress her outstanding chastity and complete abstinence, in thought as well as in deed, from anything unlawful or morally reprehensible: in other words, a rejection of the calumny (referred to in {4:156} and obliquely alluded to in {19:27-28}) that the birth of Jesus was the result of an "illicit union".
88	For my rendering of the term ayah as "symbol", see surah {17}, note [2], and surah {19}, note [16].
89	After calling to mind, in verses {48-91}, some of the earlier prophets, all of whom stressed the oneness and uniqueness of God, the discourse returns to that principle of oneness as it ought to be reflected in the unity of all who believe in Him. (See {23: 51} ff.)
90	This is the meaning of the idiomatic phrase, taqatta'u amrahum baynahum. As Zamakhshari points out, the sudden turn of the discourse from the second person plural to the third person is indicative of God's severe disapproval-His "turning away", as it were, from those who are or were guilty of breaking the believers' unity. (See also {23:53} and the corresponding note [30].)
91	I.e., even a breach of religious unity may not be unforgivable so long as it does not involve a worship of false deities or false moral values (cf. verses {98-99} below): this is the meaning of the stress, in this context, on man's being "a believer withal" -an echo of the principle clearly spelt out in {2:62} and several other Qur'anic passages.
92	Lit., "an inviolable law (haram) upon ...", expressing the impossibility of conceiving anything to the contrary (Zamakhshari).
93	I.e., whenever God consigns a community to destruction, He does it not because of its people's occasional lapses but only because of their irremediable, conscious unwillingness to forsake their sinful ways.
94	I.e., until the Day of Resurrection, heralded by the allegorical break-through of "Gog and Magog" (see surah {18}, note [100], especially the last sentence): for it is on that Day that even the most hardened sinner will at last realize his guilt and be filled with belated remorse.-The term hadab literally denotes "raised ground" or "elevation", but the expression min kulli hadabin is used here idiomatically, signifying "from all directions" or "from every corner [of the earth]": an allusion to the irresistible nature of the social and cultural catastrophes which will overwhelm mankind before the coming of the Last Hour.
95	I.e., deliberately and without any excuse, since all the prophets had warned man of the Day of Resurrection and Judgment: cf. {14:44-45}. The words "bent on" interpolated by me within brackets indicate intent, similar to the preceding expression alladhina kafaru, "those who were bent on denying the truth" (see also note [6] on {2:6}).
96	Lit., "you are bound to reach it". The expression "all that you have worshipped instead of God" comprises not merely all false religious imagery but also all false ethical values endowed with quasi-divine sanctity, all of which are but "the fuel of hell".
97	Thus, spiritual "deafness" in the life to come will be the inexorable consequence of one's having remained deaf, in this world, to the voice of truth, just as "blindness" and oblivion will be part of the suffering of all who have been spiritually blind to the truth (cf. {20:124-126}).
98	I.e., those who have been promised paradise on account of their faith and their good deeds. 99	See in this connection {14:48} and the corresponding note [63].
100	Lit., "after the reminder (adh-dhikr)". For the deeper implications of the Qur'anic term dhikr, see note [13] on verse {10} of this surah.
101	Zabur (lit., "scripture" or "book") is a generic term denoting any "book of wisdom": hence, any and all of the divine scriptures revealed by God to the prophets (Tabari). The statement that "My righteous servants shall inherit the earth" is obviously an echo of the promise, "You are bound to rise high if you are [truly] believers" ({3: 139}) - the implication being that it is only through faith in God and righteous behaviour on earth that man can reach the heights envisaged for him by his Creator's grace.
102	I.e., towards all mankind. For an elucidation of this fundamental principle underlying the message of the Qur'an, see {7:158} and the corresponding note [126]. The universality of the Qur'anic revelation arises from three factors: firstly, its appeal to all mankind irrespective of descent, race or cultural environment; secondly, the fact that it appeals exclusively to man's reason and, hence, does not postulate any dogma that could be accepted on the basis of blind faith alone; and, finally, the fact that - contrary to all other sacred scriptures known to history - the Qur'an has remained entirely unchanged in its wording ever since its revelation fourteen centuries ago and will, because it is so widely recorded, forever remain so in accordance with the divine promise, "it is We who shall truly guard it [from all corruption]" (cf. {15:9} and the corresponding note [10]). It is by virtue of these three factors that the Qur'an represents the final stage of all divine revelation, and that the Prophet through whom it has been conveyed to mankind is stated to have been the last (in Qur'anic terminology, "the seal") of all prophets (cf. {33:40}).
103	Cf. the first sentence of verse {45} of this surah. This stress on divine revelation as the only source of the Prophet's knowledge referred to in the sequence is expressed, in Arabic, by means of the restrictive particle innama.
104	The expression 'ala sawa (lit., "in an equitable manner") comprises in this context two distinct concepts: that of fairness as regards the clarity and unambiguity of the above announcement, as well as of equality, implying that it is being made to all human beings alike; hence my composite rendering of this phrase.
105	Lit., "enjoyment [of life] for a while": i.e., a chance, mercifully granted by God, to attain to
106	See note [5] on verse {4} of this surah.
107	Lit., "against {'ala) all that you attribute [to Him] by way of description" or "of definition" (see note [88] on the last sentence of {6:100}): implying that only God's grace can save man from the blasphemous attempts - prompted by his inherent weakness - to bring God "closer" to his own, human understanding by means of humanly-conceived "definitions" of Him who is transcendent, infinite and unfathomable.
