THE SEVENTY-FIRST SURAH
NUH (NOAH)

1	Namely until the end of each person's life - implying that although they might be forgiven all sins committed before their postulated change of heart, they would henceforth, until their death, be held fully accountable for their behaviour in the light of that new-found faith. Cf. {4:18} - "repentance shall not be accepted from those who do evil deeds until their dying hour and then say, 'Behold, I now repent'".
2	Lit., "has not increased them in anything but flight".
3	For the reason of the above interpolation - which endows the concept of "garments" with a metaphorical meaning - see note [2] on {74:4}; cf. also the expression "garment of God-consciousness" (libas at-taqwa) in {7:26}.
4	Lit.,"He will let loose the sky over you with abundance" (but see also note [76] on {ll:52}).
5	The two last-mentioned blessings are an allusion to the state of happiness in the hereafter, symbolised in the Qur'an as "gardens through which running waters flow".
6	I.e., "that you refuse to believe in God" (Zamakhshari). Some authorities (e.g., Jawhari) give to the above phrase the meaning, "that you will not fear God's majesty", which, too, implies lack of belief in Him.
7	I.e., by a process of gradual evolution, in the mother's womb, from a drop of sperm and a fertilised germ-cell (the female ovum), up to the point where the embryo becomes a new, self-contained human entity (cf.{22:5}: all of which points to the existence of a plan and a purpose and, hence, to the existence of a conscious Creator.
8	Cf.{67:3} and the corresponding note [2].
9	See {10:5}, where the sun is described as "a [source of] radiant light" (diya') and the moon as "light [reflected]" (nur); both these interpolations are explained in note [10] on {10:5}.
10	This phrase has a twofold meaning. In the first instance, it alludes to the evolution of the individual human body out of the same substances - both organic and inorganic - as are found in and on the earth as well: and in this sense it enlarges upon the creation of the human individual "in successive stages" referred to in verse {14} above. Secondly, it alludes to the evolution of the human species, which, starting from the most primitive organisms living on earth, has gradually ascended to ever higher stages of development until it has finally reached that complexity of body, mind and soul evident in the human being.
11	Lit., "with a [final] bringing-forth".
12	I.e., "He has provided you with all facilities for a good life on earth" - the unspoken implication being, "Will you not, then, acknowledge Him and be grateful to Him?"
13	Lit., "and have followed him whose wealth and children do not increase him in aught but loss": i.e., people whose propensity and power only enhance their false pride and arrogance, and thus lead them to spiritual ruin. Beyond this, we have here a subtle allusion to the fact that an exclusive devotion to material prosperity must of necessity, in the long run, destroy all moral values and, thus, the very fabric of society.
14	As is evident from early sources, these five gods were among the many worshipped by the pre-lslamic Arabs as well (see the small but extremely valuable work by Hisham ibn Muhammad al-Kalbi, Kitab al-Asnam, ed. Ahmad Zaki, Cairo 1914). Their cult had probably been introduced into Arabia from Syria and Babylonia, where it seems to have existed in earliest antiquity.
15	Lit., "increase Thou not the evildoers in aught but in straying-away", i.e., from an achievement of their worldly goals (Razi).
16	Lit., "and were made to enter the fire" - the past tense indicating the inevitability of the suffering yet to come (Zamakhshari).
17	Lit., "to such as are wicked (fajir), stubbornly ingrate (kaffar)": but since no one - and particularly not a prophet - is ever justified in assuming that the progeny of evildoers must of necessity be evil, it is obvious that the terms fajir and kaffar are used here metonymically, denoting qualities or attitudes, and not persons.
18	Lit., "increase Thou not the evildoers in aught but destruction" - i.e., destruction of their aims and, thus, of evil as such.
