THE FORTY-SIXTH SURAH
AL-AHQAF (THE SAND-DUNES)
MECCA PERIOD

1	See Appendix II.
2	Regarding the expression "in accordance with [an inner] truth", see note [11] on {10:5}. The reference to the "term" set by God to all creation is meant to stress the fact of its finality in time as well as in space, in contrast with His Own timelessness and infinity.
3	Lit., "from that whereof they have been warned": i.e., they refuse to heed the warning not to attribute divine qualities to any being or force beside God.
4	Sc., "in support of your claim that there are other divine powers besides God".
5	Lit., "will not respond to him till the Day of Resurrection", i.e., never.
6	For this symbolic "enmity" of all false objects of worship, see note [11] on {lS}.
7	Lit.' "sorcery": see note [12] on {74:24}, where the term sihr has been used, chronologically, for the first time in the above sense. As in that early instance, the truth referred to here is the message of the Qur'an.
8	Sc., "then why should I have invented all this for your sake?"
9	The implication is, "May God forgive you, and grace you with His guidance" (Zamakhshari).
10	Thus Tabari, Baghawi, Razi, Ibn Kathir, implying - as Razi stresses - "I am but a human being like all of God's message-bearers who preceded me". Alternatively, the phrase may be rendered as "I am no innovator among the apostles" - i.e., "I am not preaching anything that was not already preached by all of God's apostles before me" (Razi and Baydawi): which coincides with the Qur'anic doctrine of the identity of the ethical teachings propounded by all of God's prophets.
11	I.e., "What will happen to all of us in this world" (Tabari, quoting with approval this interpretation of Al-Hasan al-Basri), or "both in this world and in the hereafter" (Baydawi). Either of these two interpretations implies a denial on the Prophet's part of any foreknowledge of the future and, in a wider sense, any knowledge of "that which is beyond the reach of human perception" (al-ghayb): cf. {6:50} or {7:188}.
12	I.e., a prophet like himself. The "witness" spoken of here is evidently Moses: cf. the two Biblical passages relating to the advent of the Prophet Muhammad (Deuteronomy xviii, 15 and 18): "The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me"; and "I will raise them up a prophet from among thy brethren, like unto thee, and will put My words in his mouth." (See in this connection note [33] on {2:42}.)
13	Lit., "towards it". Almost all of the classical commentators assume that this refers specifically, to the contempt with which the pagan Quraysh looked down upon the early followers of Muhammad, most of whom came from the poorest, lowliest strata of Meccan society. However, the abouve "saying" has undoubtedly a timeless import inasmuch as the poor and lowly have always been among the first to follow a prophet. Moreover, it may also have a bearing on our times as well, inasmuch as the materially powerful nations, whom their technological progress has blinded to many spiritual verities, are increasingly contemptuous of the weakness of those civilizations in which religion still plays an important, albeit largely formalistic, role; and so, not realizing that this very formalism and the ensuing cultural sterility, and not religious faith as such, is the innermost cause of that weakness, they attribute it to the influence of religion per se, saying as it were, "If religion were any good, we would have been the first in holding on to it" - thus "justifying" their own materialistic attitude and their refusal to be guided by spiritual considerations.
14	I.e., the concept of divine revelation as such, as is evident from the subsequent reference to the revelation of Moses.
15	Sc., in its original, uncorrupted form.
16	Cf. {29:8} and {31:14}. In the present instance, this connects with the reference to the "doers of good" at the end of verse {12} and in verses {13-14}.
17	See note [14] on {31:14}.
18	I.e., the age at which man is supposed to attain to full intellectual and spiritual maturity. It is to be borne in mind that the masculine noun insan ("man" or "human being") appearing in the first sentence of this verse applies to both sexes alike.
19	Sc.. "of whatever sin I may have committed". See note [41] on the last sentence of {24:31}.
20	I.e., "whom We shall reward in accordance with the best that they ever did": cf. {29:7}.
21	Sc., "without any indication that anyone has been or will be resurrected". This parabolical "dialogue" is not only meant to illustrate the ever-recurring - and perhaps natural - conflict between older and younger generations, but also points to the transmission of religious ideas as the most important function of parenthood, and thus, in a wider sense, as the basic element of all social continuity.
22	See Appendix III.
23	The particle li prefixed to the subsequent verb is evidently what the  grammarians call a lam al-'aqibah: i.e., not an indication of intent ("so that") but simply of a causal sequence, which is best rendered as "and", "and so", or "hence".
24	I.e., for having arrogantly, without any objective justification, asserted that there is no life after death.
25	I.e., the Prophet Hud (see surah {7}, note [48]). The mention of Hud and the tribe of 'Ad connects with the last sentence of the preceding verse, inasmuch as this tribe "transgressed all bounds of equity all over their lands" ({89:11}).
26	Lit., "from between his hands and from behind him". This idiomatic phrase (explained in note [247] on {2:255}) is evidently an allusion to the many warning messages, in Hud's own time as well as in the almost forgotten past, which ought to have made - but did not make - the tribe of 'Ad conscious of how far astray they had gone. We have here a subtle, parenthetic reminder that, apart from the revelations which He bestows upon His prophets, God offers His guidance to man through the many signs and warnings apparent in all nature as well as in the changing conditions of human society.
27	I.e., when they beheld, without recognizing it as such, the approach of their doom.
28	Lit., "then they became so that .. .", etc. See {69:6-8}, describing the sandstorm which destroyed the tribe of 'Ad without leaving any trace of them.
29	This relates in the first instance to the pagan contemporaries of the  Prophet, but applies to later generations as well. - The tribe of 'Ad were the unchallenged lords in the vast region in which they lived (cf. {89:8} - "the like of whom has never been reared in all the land"). Moreover, the social conditions of their time were so simple and so free of the many uncertainties and dangers which beset people of higher civilizations that they could be regarded as more "securely established" on earth than people of later, more complex times.
30	I.e., intellect and feeling, both of which are comprised in the noun fu'ad.
31	Lit.. "enfolded".
32	I.e., "close to you in space as well as in time". In its wider sense, this phrase denotes "all the rest of the world".
33	This clause gives the meaning of the expression qurbanan, which contains an allusion not merely to false deities but also to the deification of saints,living or dead, who allegedly act as mediators between man and the transcendental Supreme Being.
34	Lit., "that was their lie and all that they were wont to invent .
35	See surah {2}, note [21]. The connection between this passage and the preceding one apparently lies in the fact that whereas "those who are lost in sin" (of whom the tribe of 'Ad is given as an example) refuse to heed God's messages, the "unseen beings" spoken of in the sequence immediately perceived their truth and accepted them.
36	The term nafar signifies a group of more than three and up to ten persons. The occurrence mentioned in this passage - said to have taken place in the small oasis of Nakhlah, on the way leading from Mecca to Ta'if (Tabari) - is evidently identical with that described in {72:1-15}; for a tentative explanation, see note [1] on {72:1}.
37	Lit., "as soon as they attended to it", i.e., to its recitation by the Prophet.
38	I.e., as preachers of the Qur'anic creed. The expression "as warners" connects with the preceding references to "warning messages".
39	For an explanation of this rendering of the phrase ma bayna yadayhi, see surah {3}, note [3]. - As pointed out in note [1] on {72:1}, this reference to the Qur'an as revealed "after Moses", omitting any mention of Jesus, seems to indicate that the speakers were followers of the Jewish faith; hence my interpolation of the words "of the Torah".
40	See note [11] on {72:15}.
41	This is apparently an allusion to the Qur'anic doctrine that God's creative activity is continuous and unending.
42	I.e., the reality of life after death.
43	In this parabolic manner the Qur'an points to the illusory concept of "time" as experienced by the human mind - a concept which has no bearing on the ultimate reality to be unfolded in the hereafter.
44	Cf. the last sentence of {6:47} and the corresponding note [37].

