SURAH 18
AL-KAHF (THE CAVE)

1	Lit., “and has not given it any deviousness”. The term 'iwaj signifies “crookedness”, “tortuousness” or “deviation” (e.g., from a path), as well as “distortion” or “deviousness” in the abstract sense of these words. The above phrase is meant to establish the direct, unambiguous character of the Qur’an and to stress its freedom from all obscurities and internal contradictions: cf. {4:82}— “Had it issued from any but God, they would surely have found in it many an inner contradiction!”
2	Most of the classical commentators (and, as far as I am aware, all the earlier translators of the Qur'an) relate the pronoun in bihi to the assertion that “God has taken unto Himself a son”, and hence take the phrase to mean, “They have no knowledge of it”, i.e., no knowledge of such a happening. However, this interpretation is weak inasmuch as absence of knowledge does not necessarily imply an objective negation of the fact to which it relates. It is, therefore, obvious that bihi cannot signify “of it”: it signifies “of Him”, and relates to God. Hence, the phrase must be rendered as above — meaning that they who make such a preposterous claim have no real knowledge of Him, since they attribute to the Supreme Being something that is attributable only to created, imperfect beings. This interpretation is supported, in an unequivocal manner, by Tabari and, as an alternative, by Baydawi.
3	Lit., "it may well be that thou wilt...", etc. However, the particle la'alla does not, in this context, indicate a possibility but, rather, a rhetorical question implying a reproach for the attitude referred to (Maraghi XIII, 116).
4	This rhetorical question is addressed, in the first instance, to the Prophet, who was deeply distressed by the hostility which his message aroused among the pagan Meccans, and suffered agonies of apprehension regarding their spiritual fate. Beyond that, however, it applies to everyone who, having become convinced of the truth of an ethical proposition, is dismayed at the indifference with which his social environment reacts to it.
5	Lit., "We have made all that exists on earth as its adornment in order that We might put them [i.e., all human beings] to a test": meaning that God lets them reveal their real characters in their respective attitudes - moral or immoral - towards the material goods and benefits which the world offers them. In further analysis, this passage implies that the real motive underlying men's refusal to believe in God's spiritual message (see preceding verse) is almost always their excessive, blind attachment to the good of this world, combined with a false pride in what they regard as their own achievements (cf. {16:22} and the corresponding note [15]).
6	This interpolation establishes the elliptically implied connection between the long passage that follows and the preceding two verses.
7a	Lit., "that the Men of the Cave...were more wondrous...", etc. - the implication being that the allegory or parable based on this story is entirely in tune with the ethical doctrine propounded in the Qur'an as a whole, and therefore not "more wondrous" than any other of its statements. - As regards the story of the Men of the Cave as such, most of the commentators incline to the view that it relates to a phase in early Christian history - namely, the persecution of the Christians by Emperor Decius in the third century. Legend has it that some young Christians of Ephesus, accompanied by their dog, withdrew into a secluded cave in order to be able to live in accordance with their faith, and remained there, miraculously asleep, for a great length of time (according to some accounts, referred to in verse {25} of this surah, for about three centuries). When they finally awoke - unaware of the long time during which they had lain asleep - they sent one of their company to the town to purchase some food. In the meantime the situation had changed entirely: Christianity was no longer persecuted and had even become the official religion of the Roman Empire. The ancient coin (dating from the reign of Decius) with which the young man wanted to pay for his purchases immediately aroused curiosity; people began to question the stranger, and the story of the Men of the Cave and their miraculous sleep came to light.
7b	As already mentioned, the majority of the classical commentators rely on this Christian legend in their endeavour to interpret the Qur’anic reference (in verses {9—26}) to the Men of the Cave. It seems, however, that the Christian formulation of this theme is a later development of a much older oral tradition — a tradition which, in fact, goes back to pre-Christian, Jewish sources. This is evident from several well-authenticated ahadith (mentioned by all the classical commentators), according to which it was the Jewish rabbis (ahbar) of Medina who induced the Meccan opponents of Muhammad to “test his veracity” by asking him to explain, among other problems, the story of the Men of the Cave. Referring to these ahadith, Ibn Kathir remarks in his Commentary on verse {13} of this surah: “It has been said that they were followers of Jesus the son of Mary, but God knows it better: it is obvious that they lived much earlier than the Christian period — for, had they been Christians, why should the Jewish rabbis have been intent on preserving their story, seeing that the Jews had cut themselves off from all friendly communion with them [i.e., the Christians]?” We may, therefore, safely assume that the legend of the Men of the Cave — stripped of its Christian garb and the superimposed Christian background — is, substantially, of Jewish origin. If we discard the later syncretic additions and reduce the story to its fundamentals — voluntary withdrawal from the world, agelong “sleep” in a secluded cave and a miraculous “awakening” after an indeterminate period of time — we have before us a striking allegory relating to a movement which played an important role in Jewish religious history during the centuries immediately preceding and following the advent of Jesus: namely, the ascetic Essene Brotherhood (to which, as I have pointed out in note [42] on {3:52}, Jesus himself may have belonged), and particularly that of its branches which lived in self-imposed solitude in the vicinity of the Dead Sea and has recently, after the discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls, come to be known as the “Qumran community”. The expression ar-raqim occurring in the above Qur'an-verse (and rendered by me as “scriptures”) lends strong support to this theory. As recorded by Tabari, some of the earliest authorities — and particularly Ibn 'Abbas — regarded this expression as synonymous with marqum (“something that is written”) and hence with kitab (“a writ” or “a scripture”); and Razi adds that “all rhetoricians and Arabic philologists assert that ar-raqim signifies [the same as] al-kitab”. Since it is historically established that the members of the Qumran community — the strictest group among the Essenes — devoted themselves entirely to the study, the copying and the preservation of the sacred scriptures, and since they lived in complete seclusion from the rest of the world and were highly admired for their piety and moral purity, it is more than probable that their mode of life made so strong an impression on the imagination of their more worldly co-religionists that it became gradually allegorized in the story of the Men of the Cave who “slept” — that is, were cut off from the outside world — for countless years, destined to be “awakened” after their spiritual task was done. But whatever the source of this legend, and irrespective of whether it is of Jewish or Christian origin, the fact remains that it is used in the Qur’an in a purely parabolic sense: namely, as an illustration of God’s power to bring about death (or “sleep”) and resurrection (or “awakening”); and, secondly, as an allegory of the piety that induces men to abandon a wicked or frivolous world in order to keep their faith unsullied, and of God’s recognition of that faith by His bestowal of a spiritual awakening which transcends time and death.
8	Lit., “and provide for us, out of our condition (min amrina), consciousness of what is right” — which latter phrase gives the meaning of the term rushd in this context. This passage is a kind of introduction to the allegory of the Men of the Cave, giving a broad outline of what is expounded more fully in verses {13} ff.
9	I.e., God caused them to remain cut off — physically or metaphorically — from the sounds and the bustle of the outside world. The classical commentators take the above phrase to mean that God “veiled their ears with sleep”.
10	Or: “sent them forth” — which may indicate a return to the active life of this world.
11	Lit., “so that We might take cognizance of”: but since God embraces all past, present and future with His knowledge, His “taking cognizance” of an event denotes His causing it to come into being and, thus, allowing it to become known by His creatures: hence, “marking it out” to the world.
12	Lit., “which of the two parties” — alluding, metonymically, to the two viewpoints mentioned in verse {19} below — “was better at computing the time-span.. .“, etc.: it should, however, be borne in mind that the verb ahsa does not merely signify “he computed” or “reckoned”, but also “he understood” or “comprehended” (Taj al~'Arus). Since a “computing” of the time which those seekers after truth had spent in the cave could have no particular bearing on the ethical implications of this parable, ahsa has here obviously the meaning of “better at comprehending” or “showing a better comprehension” — namely, of the spiritual meaning of the time-lapse between their “falling asleep” and their “awakening” (see note [25] below).
13	I.e., without the many legendary embellishments which, in times past, have obscured the purport of this story or parable.
14	Lit., “We increased [or “advanced”] them in guidance”.
15	Lit., “when they stood up” — i.e., stood up to their misguided fellow-men, or to the rulers who persecuted the believers (see note [7]).
16	Lit., “Why do they not.. .“, etc., in the form of a rhetorical query introducing a new sentence.
17	Lit., “any clear evidence [or “authority”] in their support”. The adjective bayyin (“clear”, “obvious”, “manifest”) implies an evidence accessible to reason.
18	I.e., invents imaginary deities and thus gives the lie to the truth of His oneness and uniqueness, or even denies His existence altogether.
19	The term mirfaq signifies “anything by which one benefits”, whether concrete or abstract; in this context it has obviously a spiritual connotation, marking the young men’s abandonment of the world and withdrawal into utter seclusion.
20	Lit., "while they were in a broad cleft thereof". The cave evidently opened to the north, so that the heat of the sun never disturbed them: and this, I believe is an echo of the many Qur'anic allusions to the happiness of the righteous in paradise, symbolized by its "everlasting shade" (see, in particular, surah {4}, note [74], on the metaphorical use of the term zill in the sense of "happiness").
21	I.e., an accidental onlooker would immediately have felt the mystic, awe-inspiring aura that surrounded the Men of the Cave, and would have become conscious that he stood before God's elect (Tabari, Razi, Ibn Kathir, Baydawi).
22	See note [10] above.
23	It seems to me that the prefix li in li-yatasa'alu (which most commentators take to mean "so that they might ask one another") is not a particle denoting a purpose ("so that") but, rather, a lam al-'a^qibah-that is, a particle indicating no more than a causal sequence-which in this context may be brought out by the phrase "and they began...", etc.
24	Cf. {2: 259}, where exactly the same question is asked and exactly the same wondering answer is given in the parable of the man whom God caused to be dead for a hundred years and thereupon brought back to life. The striking verbal identity of question and answer in the two passages is obviously not accidental: it points, in a deliberately revealing manner, to the identity of the idea underlying these two allegories: namely, God's power to "bring forth the living out of that which is dead, and the dead out of that which is alive" ({3: 27}, {6: 95}, {10: 31}, {30: 19}), i.e., to create life, to cause it to disappear and then to resurrect it. Beyond this, the above verse alludes to the deceptive, purely earthbound character of the human concept of "time".
25	I.e., they understood-in contrast to their companions, who were merely concerned about what had actually happened to them - that the lapse of time between their "falling asleep" and their "awakening" had no reality of its own and no meaning, just as it has no reality or meaning in connection with a human being's death and subsequent resurrection (cf. {17:52} and the corresponding note [59]): and this explains the reference to the "two viewpoints" (lit., "two parties") in verse {12} above.
26	During their "sleep", time had stood still for the Men of the Cave, and so they assumed that the outside world had remained unchanged and was, as before, hostile to them. - At this point, the story as such ends abruptly (for, as we know, the Qur'an is never concerned with narratives for their own sake) and is revealed in the sequence as an allegory of death and resurrection and of the relativity of "time" as manifested in man's consciousness.
27	I.e., by means of the legend which has grown up around the Men of the Cave and, more particularly, by means of the allegoric use which the Qur'an makes of this legend.
28	Lit., "given knowledge about them [to others]".
29	Lit., "debate their case (amrahum) among themselves": an indication of the fact that the legend of the Men of the Cave occupied men's minds for a long time, leading to many discussions and conflicting interpretations. The next sentence explains why God has "drawn [people's] attention" to this story in the context of the Qur'an.
30	This, to my mind, is the meaning of the expression 'alayhim (lit., "over them") occurring here as well as in the subsequent reference to the building of a house of worship at the suggestion of those "whose opinion prevailed in the end" (alladhina ghalabu 'ala amrihim).
31	The future tense in sayaqulun points once again to the legendary character of the story as such, and implies that all soeculation about its details is irrelevant to its parabolic, ethical purport.
32	I.e., for the sake of the self-evident ethical lesson to be derived from their story: an allusion to the first paragraph of verse {21} above.
33	According to almost all of the commentators, this parenthetic passage (verses {23-24}) is primarily addressed to the Prophet, who, on being asked by some of the pagan Quraysh as to what "really" happened to the Men of the Cave, is said to have replied, "I shall give you my answer tomorrow" - whereupon revelation was temporarily withheld from him in token of God's dis-approval; in the second instance, this exhortation expresses a general principle addressed to all believers.
34	This obviously connects with the "idle guesses" mentioned in the first paragraph of verse {22} above - guesses refuted by the subsequent statements, "My Sustainer knows best how many they were" in verse {22}, and "God knows best how long they remained [there]" in verse {26}. This was, in particular, the view of 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, whose copy of the Qur'an is said to have contained the words, "And they [i.e., some people] said, 'They remained...'," etc. (which was probably a marginal, explanatory remark added by Ibn Mas'ud), as well as of Qatadah and of Matar al-Warraq (Tabari, Zamakhshari and Ibn Kathir). My interpolation, at the beginning of the verse, of the words "some people asserted" is based on the word qalu ("they said") used by Ibn Mas'ud in his marginal note.
35	According to Razi, it is on this passage, among others, that the great Qur'an-commentator Abu Muslim al-Isfahani based his rejection of the so-called "doctrine of abrogation" discussed in my note [87] on {2: 106}.
36	For an explanation of this verse, see {6:52} and the corresponding note [41].
37	See surah {2}, note [7]. Zamakshari and Razi explain the verb aghfalna - agreeably with Qur'anic doctrine - as meaning "whom We have found to be heedless". (See also my note [4] on the second part of {14:4}.)
38	Lit., "and whose case (amr) was one of abandonment of [or "transgression against"] all bounds [of what is right]".
39	Thus Razi explains the expression az-zalimun (lit., "the evildoers") in the above context.
40	The expression suradiq-rendered by me as "billowing folds"-literally denotes an awning or the outer covering of a tent, and alludes here to the billowing "walls of smoke" that will surround the sinners (Zamakhshari): a symbolism meant to stress the inescapability of their suffering in the hereafter (Razi).
41	Like all other Qur'anic descriptions of happenings in the hereafter, the above reference to the "adornment" of the believers with gold and jewels and silk (cf. similar passages in {22:23}, {35:33} and {76:21}) and their "reclining upon couches (ara'ik)" is obviously an allegory - in this case, an allegory of the splendour, the ever-fresh life (symbolized by "green garments"), and the restful fulfilment that awaits them in result of the many acts of self-denial which their faith had imposed on them during their earthly life. - Referring to the symbolism of these joys of paradise Razi draws our attention to the difference in the construction of the two parts of this clause: the first part is in the passive form ("they will be adorned...") and the second, in the active ("they will wear..."). In his opinion, the active form alludes to what the righteous will have earned by virtue of their deeds, whereas the passive form denotes all that will be bestowed on them by God above and beyond their deserts.
42	This parable connects with verses {7-8} of this surah, and serves as an illustration of the statement that "all beauty on earth is a means by which God puts men to a test".
43	Lit., "brought back [or "referred"] to my Sustainer" - i.e., for judgment.
44	See second half of note [47] on {3: 59}, and note [4] on {23: 12}.
45	Lit., "I shall not [or "do not"] associate anyone [or "anything"] with my Sustainer" - i.e., "I cannot associate in my mind wealth or poverty with any power or creative cause other than Him" (Qiffal, as quoted by Razi).
46	For an explanation of my rendering of law-la as "alas", see note [119] on {10: 98}.
47	Lit.. "he had no host whatever".
48	Lit., "the best as regards the consequence".
49	Lit., "are better in thy Sustainer's sight as regards merit, and better as regards hope". The expression al-bagiyat as-salihat ("good deeds, the fruit whereof endures forever") occurs in the Qur'an twice - in the above verse as well as in {19: 76}.
50	I.e., to those who in their lifetime denied the truth of resurrection.
51	Cf. {6:94}.
52	This short reference to the oft-repeated allegory of God's command to the angels to "prostrate themselves before Adam" is meant, in the above context, to stress man's inborn faculty of conceptual thinking (see {2: 31-34} and the corresponding notes) and, thus, his ability and obligation to discern between right and wrong. Since man's deliberate choice of a morally wrong course - of which the preceding passages speak - is almost invariably due to his exaggerated attachment to the allurements of worldly life, attention is drawn here to the fact that this attachment is the means by which Satan (or Iblis) induces man to forgo all moral considerations and thus brings about his spiritual ruin.
53	Denoting, in this instance, the angels (see Appendix III).
54	Lit., "his offspring" - a metonym for all who follow him.
55	Lit., "for the evildoers". As regards Satan's symbolic "rebellion" against God, see note [26] on {2:34} and note [31] on {15:41}.
56	I.e., "since they are but created beings, and not co-existent with Me, how can you take them for your masters?"-an allusion to the beings, real or imaginary, to which men ascribe divine qualities, either consciously or (as in the case of one's submission to the "whisperings of Satan") by subconscious implication.
57	Since God is almighty, all-knowing and self-sufficient, the belief that any being or power could have a "helping" share in His divinity, or could "mediate" between Him and man, causes the latter to go utterly astray.
58	Lit., "those partners of Mine whom you supposed [to exist]": see note [15] on {6:22}.
59	Or: "a gulf [or "a barrier"] of perdition": an allusion to the wide gulf of unreality that separates those sinners from the blasphemous figments of their imagination or, more probably, the gulf that separates them from the saintly persons whom they were wont to worship despite the fact that the latter had never made any claim to divine status (Zamakhshari and Razi in one of their alternative interpretations, with specific mention of Jesus and Mary).
60	Cf. note [104] on {17: 89}, explaining my translation of mathal, in this context, as "lesson".
61	Lit., "face to face" or "in the future" (Zamakhshari) - both these meanings of qubulan being comprised in the concept of "the hereafter" or "the life to come".
62	I.e., persevering in his unrighteous behaviour (Razi).
63	Lit., "to guidance".
64	Lit., "He would indeed hasten the punishment for them"-the implication being that He invariably allows them time to repent and mend their ways.
65	Cf. somewhat similar passages in {16:61} and {35:45}. The "time-limit" (maw'id) signifies, in this context, the end of the sinners' life on earth or - as in the next verse - the "point of no return" beyond which God does not allow them to sin with impunity.
66	Lit., "when [or "after"] they had been doing wrong" - i.e., persistently and for a long time.
67	The particle idh (which usually signifies "when", but is, I believe, properly rendered here as "lo!") often serves in the Qur'an to draw attention to a sudden turn in the discourse, without, however, involving a break in the continuity of thought. In this instance, it evidently marks a connection with verse {54} above ("many facets have We given in this Qur'an to every kind of lesson [designed] for [the benefit of] mankind"), and introduces an allegory meant to illustrate the fact that knowledge, and particularly spiritual knowledge, is inexhaustible, so that no human being- not even a prophet- can ever claim to possess answers to all the questions that perplex man throughout his life. (This idea is brought out fully in the last two verses of this surah.) The subsequent parable of Moses and his quest for knowledge (verses {6-82}) has become, in the course of time, the nucleus of innumerable legends with which we are not concerned here. We have, however, a Tradition on the authority of Ubayy ibn Ka'b (recorded in several versions by Bukhari, Muslim and Tirmidhi), according to which Moses was rebuked by God for having once asserted that he was the wisest of all men, and was subsequently told through revelation that a "servant of God" who lived at the "junction of the two seas" was far superior to him in wisdom. When Moses expressed his eagerness to find that man, God commanded him to "take a fish in a basket" and to go on and on until the fish would disappear: and its disappearance was to be a sign that the goal had been reached. - There is no doubt that this Tradition is a kind of allegorical introduction to our Qur'anic parable. The "fish" mentioned in the latter as well as in the above-mentioned hadith is an ancient religious symbol, possibly signifying divine knowledge or life eternal. As for the "junction of the two seas", which many of the early commentators endeavoured to "identify" in geographical terms (ranging from the meeting of the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean at the Bab al-Mandab to that of the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean at the Straits of Gibraltar), Baydawi offers, in his commentary on verse {60}, a purely allegorical explanation: the "two seas" represent the two sources or streams of knowledge - the one obtainable through the observation and intellectual coordination of outward phenomena ('ilm az-zahir), and the other through intuitive, mystic insight ('ilm al-batin) - the meeting of which is the real goal of Moses' quest.
68	Lit., "young man" (fata)-a term applied, in early Arabic usage, to one's servant (irrespective of his age). According to tradition, it was Joshua, who was to become the leader of the Israelites after the death of Moses.
69	Lit., "burrowing [into it]". Their forgetting the symbolic "fish" (see last third of note [67]) is perhaps an allusion to man's frequently forgetting that God is the ultimate source of all knowledge and life.
70	Lit., "Didst thou see?" Although formulated as a question, this idiomatic phrase often expresses-as does its modern equivalent, "Would you believe it?"-no more than a sudden remembrance of, or surprise at, an unusual or absurd happening.
71	Lit., "made me forget it lest I remember it".
72	I.e., the disappearance of the fish indicated the point at which their quest was to end (see note [67]).
73	In the Tradition on the authority of Ubayy ibn Ka'b (referred to in note [67]) this mysterious sage is spoken of as Al-Khadir or Al-Khidr, meaning "the Green One". Apparently this is an epithet rather than a name, implying (according to popular legend) that his wisdom was ever-fresh ("green") and imperishable: a notion which bears out the assumption that we have here an allegoric figure symbolizing the utmost depth of mystic insight accessible to man.
74	Lit., "that thou cost not encompass with [thy] experience (khubran)": according to Razi, an allusion to the fact that even a prophet like Moses did not fully comprehend the inner reality of things (haqa'iq al-ashya' kama hiya); and, more generally, to man's lack of equanimity whenever he is faced with something that he has never yet experienced or cannot immediately comprehend. In the last analysis, the above verse implies - as is brought out fully in Moses' subsequent experiences-that appearance and reality do not always coincide; beyond that, it touches in a subtle manner upon the profound truth that man cannot really comprehend or even visualize anything that has no counterpart - at least in its component elements - in his own intellectual experience: and this is the reason for the Qur'anic use of metaphor and allegory with regard to "all that is beyond the reach of a created being's perception" (al-ghayb).
75	Lit., "he".
76	Lit., "asked its people".
77	Lit., "to cause a fault in it" - i.e., to make it temporarily unserviceable.
78	Lit., "we feared" - but it should be borne in mind that, beyond this primary meaning, the verb khashiya sometimes denotes "he had reason to fear" and, consequently, "he knew", i.e., that something bad would happen (Taj al-'Arus, with specific reference to the above verse): and so we may assume that the sage's expression of "fear" was synonymous with positive "knowledge" gained through outward evidence or through mystic insight (the latter being more probable, as indicated by his statement in the second paragraph of the next verse, "I did not do [any of] this of my own accord").
79	I.e., left to them as an inheritance. Presumably that treasure would have been exposed to view if the wall had been allowed to tumble down, and would have been stolen by the avaricious village folk, who had shown their true character by refusing all hospitality to weary travellers.
80	Implying that whatever he had done was done under the impulsion of a higher truth-the mystic insight which revealed to him the reality behind the outward appearance of things and made him a conscious particle in God's unfathomable plan: and this explains the use of the plural "we" in verses {80-81}, as well as the direct attribution, in the first paragraph of verse {82}, of a concrete human action to God's will (Razi).
81	Lit., "I will convey unto you a remembrance [or "mention"] of him" - i.e., something that is worthy of remembrance and mention: which, I believe, is an allusion to the parabolic character of the subsequent story and the fact that is is confined, like the preceding parable of Moses and the unknown sage, to a few fundamental, spiritual truths.- the epithet Dhu 'l-Qarnayn signifies "the Two-Horned One" or "He of the Two Epochs", since the noun -qarn has the meaning of "horn" as well as of "generation" or "epoch" or "age" or "century". The classical commentators incline to the first of these meanings ("the Two-Horned"); and in this they appear to have been influenced by the ancient Middle-Eastern imagery of "horns" as symbols of power and greatness, although the Qur'an itself does not offer any warrant for this interpretation. In fact, the term -qarn (and its plural qurun) occurs in the Qur'an-apart from the combination Dhu 'l-Qarnayn appearing in verses {83}, {86} and {94} of this surah - twenty times: and each time it has the meaning of "generation" in the sense of people belonging to one particular epoch or civilization. However, since the allegory of Dhu 'l-Qarnayn is meant to illustrate the qualities of a powerful and just ruler, it is possible to assume that this designation is an echo of the above-mentioned ancient symbolism, which-being familiar to the Arabs from very early times-had acquired idiomatic currency in their language long before the advent of Islam. Within the context of our Qur'anic allegory, the "two horns" may be taken to denote the two sources of power with which Dhu 'l-Qarnayn is said to have been endowed: namely, the worldly might and prestige of kingship as well as the spiritual strength resulting from his faith in God. This last point is extremely important- for it is precisely the Qur'anic stress on his faith in God that makes it impossible to identify Dhu 'l-Qarnayn, as most of the commentators do, with Alexander the Great (who is represented on some of his coins with two horns on his head) or with one or another of the pre-Islamic, Himyaritic kings of Yemen. All those historic personages were pagans and worshipped a plurality of deities as a matter of course, whereas our Dhu 'l-Qarnayn is depicted as a firm believer in the One God: indeed, it is this aspect of his personality that provides the innermost reason of the Qur'anic allegory. We must, therefore, conclude that the latter has nothing to do with history or even legend, and that its sole purport is a parabolic discourse on faith and ethics, with specific reference to the problem of worldly power (see the concluding passage in the introductory note to this surah).
82	According to Ibn 'Abbes, Mujahid, Sa'id ibn Jubayr, 'Ikrimah, Qatadah and Ad-Dahhak (all of them quoted by Ibn Kathir), the term sabab - lit., "a means to achieve [anything]" - denotes, in this context, the knowledge of the right means for the achievement of a particular end.
83	Lit., "he followed [the right] means": i.e., he never employed wrong means to achieve even a righteous goal.
84	I.e., the westernmost point of his expedition (Razl).
85	Or: "abundance of water" - which, according to many philologists (cf. Taj al-'Arus), is one of the meanings of 'ayn (primarily denoting a "spring"). As for my rendering of the phrase "he found it (wajadaha) setting...", etc., as "it appeared to him that it was setting", see Razi and Ibn Kathir, both of whom point out that we have here a metaphor based on the common optical illusion of the sun's "disappearing into the sea"; and Razi explains this, correctly, by the fact that the earth is spherical. (It is interesting to note that, according to him, this explanation was already advanced in the-now lost-Qur'an-commentary of Abu 'Ali al-Jubba'i, the famous Mu'tazili scholar who died in 303 H., which corresponds to 915 or 916 of the Christian era.)
86	This divine permission to choose between two possible courses of action is not only a metonymic statement of the freedom of will accorded by God to man, but establishes also the important legal principle of istihsan (social or moral preference) open to a ruler or government in deciding as to what might be conducive to the greatest good (maslahah) of the community as a whole: and this is the first "lesson" of the parable of Dhu'l-Qarnayn.
87	Cf. {11:117} and the corresponding note [149].
88	I.e., in the hereafter - implying that nothing that pertains to the life to come could ever be imagined or defined in terms of human experience.
89	Since righteous behaviour is the norm expected of man, the laws relating thereto must not be too demanding-which is another lesson to be drawn from this parable.
90	For this rendering of the particle thumma, see surah {6}, note [31].
91	I.e., the easternmost point of his expedition (similar to the expression "the setting of the sun" in verse {86}).
92	This is Razi's interpretation of the isolated expression kadhalika ("thus" or "thus it was") occurring here. It obviously relates to the primitive, natural state of those people who needed no clothes to protect them from the sun, and to the (implied) fact that Dhu 'l-Qarnayn left them as he had found them, being mindful not to upset their mode of life and thus to cause them misery.
93	Lit., "all that was with him" - i.e., his resolve not to "corrupt [or "change"] God's creation" (cf. the second half of my note [141] on {4: 119}) - which, I believe, is a further ethical lesson to be derived from this parable.
94	This is generally assumed to be the Caucasus. However, since neither the Qur'an nor any authentic Tradition says anything about the location of these "two mountain-barriers" or the people who lived there, we can safely dismiss all the speculations advanced by the commentators on this score as irrelevant, the more so as the story of Dhu 'I-Qarnayn aims at no more than the illustration of certain ethical principles in a parabolic manner.
95	This is the form in which these names (in Arabic, Yajuj and Majuj) have achieved currency in all European languages on the basis of certain vague references to them in the Bible (Genesis x, 2, I Chronicles i, 5, Ezekiel xxxviii, 2 and xxxix, 6, Revelation of St. John xx, 8). Most of the post-classical commentators identify these tribes with the Mongols and Tatars (see note [100] below).
96	It is generally assumed that the phrase “that wherein my Sustainer has so securely established me (makkanni)” refers to the power and wealth bestowed on him; but it is much more probable — and certainly more consistent with the ethical tenor of the whole parable of Dhu ‘l-Qarnayn — that it refers to God’s guidance rather than to worldly possessions.
97	Lit., "Blow!"
98	Lit., "they".
99	Lit., "my Sustainer's promise".
100	Some of the classical commentators (e.g., Tabari) regard this as a prediction of a definite, historic event: namely, the future break-through of the savage tribes of "Gog and Magog", who are conceived of as identical with the Mongols and Tatars (see note [95] above). This "identification" is mainly based on a well-authenticated Tradition - recorded by Ibn Hanbal, Bukhari and Muslim - which tells us that the Apostle of God had a prophetic dream to which he referred on awakening, with an exclamation of distress: "There is no deity save God! Woe unto the Arabs from a misfortune that is approaching: a little gap has been opened today in the rampart of Gog and Magog!" Ever since the late Middle Ages, Muslims have been inclined to discern in this dream a prediction of the great Mongol invasion in the thirteenth century, which destroyed the Abbasid Empire and, thus, the political power of the Arabs. However, the mention, in verses {99-101} of this surah, of "the Day" - i.e., the Day of Judgment - in connection with "Gog and Magog" shows that "the time appointed by my Sustainer" relates to the coming of the Last Hour, when all works of man will be destroyed. But since none of the Qur'anic references to the "approach" or the "nearness" of the Last Hour has anything to do with the human concept of time, it is possible to accept both of the above interpretations as equally valid in the sense that the "coming of the Last Hour" comprises an indefinite - and, in human terms, perhaps even immensely long- span of time, and that the break-through of the godless forces of "Gog and Magog" was to be one of the signs of its approach. And, finally, it is most logical to assume (especially on the basis of {21: 96-97}) that the terms Yajuj and Majuj are purely allegorical, applying not to any specific tribes or beings but to a series of social catastrophes which would cause a complete destruction of man's civilization before the coming of the Last Hour.
101	I.e., on the Day of Judgment alluded to in the preceding verse.
102	This is an allusion not only to the worship of created beings or forces of nature, but also to the popular belief that saints, whether alive or dead, could eflfectively "intercede" with God in behalf of anyone whom He has rejected.
103	I.e., of God's oneness and uniqueness, and hence of the fact that no created being can have any "influence" on God's judgment.
104	Although each of their good actions will be taken into account on Judgment Day in accordance with the Qur'anic statement that "he who shall have done an atom's weight of good, shall behold it" ({99: 7}), the above verse implies that whatever good such sinners may do is far outweighed by their godlessness (Al-Qadi 'Iyad, as quoted by Razi).
105	Lit., "if We were to produce the like of it [i.e., of the sea] in addition". It is to be noted that, as pointed out by Zamakhshari, the term al-bahr ("the sea") is used here in a generic sense, comprising all the seas that exist: hence, the expression "the like of it" has been rendered by me as "sea upon sea". (See also {31:27}).
