THE FIFTY-SECOND SURAH
AT-TUR (MOUNT SINAI)
MECCA PERIOD

1	For my rendering of the adjurative particle wa as "Consider", see first half of note [23] on {74:32}. The expression at-tur (lit., "the mountain") is used in the Qur'an exclusively to denote Mount Sinai, on which Moses received his decisive revelation. In the present context it signifies, metonymically, revelation as such, to which the next verse calls attention.
2	I.e., always open to man's understanding (Razi).
3	This is a metonym for the fact that ever since the dawn of human consciousness men have persistently - although often but dimly - realized the existence of God and have tried, spurred on by the continuous, direct revelation granted to His prophets, to come closer to Him through worship. Hence, Baydawi regards the expression al-bays al-ma'mur as a metaphor for the heart of the believer.
4	I.e., "Consider the immensity and wonderful configuration of the visible universe as an evidence of a conscious Creator."
5	This is obviously the meaning of the term sihr in the present context (see surah {74}. note [12]).
6	I.e., "you will have to endure it in either case, for it is but a consequence of your own doings and attitudes": a subtle allusion to the fact that the "punishments" and "rewards" in the life to come are but allegories of the logical consequences of the manner in which one acts or behaves in this life.
7	As explained by Razi in his comments on the above verse as well as on {18:31} and {55:54}, the "reclining on couches" or "on carpets" in paradise is a symbol of inner fulfilment and peace of mind; and he points out that this is also alluded to in the identity of the verbal root sarra ("he was [or "became"] happy") in both the nouns surur ("happiness") and sarir ("couch").
8	For an explanation of the expression hur'in, see surah {56}, note [8].
9	Implying that the righteousness of their children increases the merit of the parents.
10	I.e., the righteousness of the parents cannot absolve their offspring from individual responsibility.
11	Cf. {37:47} - "no headiness will there be in it, and they will not get drunk thereon": and {56:19} - "by which their minds will not be clouded, and which will not make them drunk": an allegory of conscious, joyful elation. As regards the preceding reference to "fruit and meat in abundance - whatever they may desire", Razi observes that this symbolic "abundance" of sensual satisfaction will not lead to satiety but, rather, to a pleasureable desire which - contrary to what is man's lot in this world - can always be gratified.
12	See note [6] on {56:17-18}.
13	Thus Razi, explaining the selfless devotion implied in the pronoun lahum (lit., "for them" i.e., "of their own").
14	This symbolic "asking one another about their past lives" is meant to bring out the fact, often stressed in the Qur'an, that man's individual consciousness invariably survives his bodily death, to continue unbroken in the life to come.
15	Thus do all classical commentators - without, to my knowledge, any exception - interpret the above verse.
16	Sc., "through our own, actual experience". This interpolation is based on the reading of the subsequent word as annahu ("that He is"), according to the Medina school, in contrast with the more conventional Kufah and Basrah reading innahu ("verily, He is"). As Tabari stresses, either of these two readings is correct; I have chosen for my rendering the former inasmuch as it points to the overwhelming, direct insight which will be granted to the blessed on resurrection.
17	Lit., "let us await for him the evil happenings of time", i.e., brought about by time: this is the meaning given by Jawhari and Zamakhshari (in the Asas) to the expression raybal-manun (which latter word is, according to these two authorities, a synonym of dahr, "time"). In the present context, the phrase obviously denotes the expectation of the Prophet's detractors that time would prove his teachings to have been false or, at best, a delusion.
18	I.e., "Whereas you are waiting for my message to be proved false, I am awaiting its fulfilment!"
19	The meaning is: Have they any reasoned objection to the contents of this message - or do they simply reject the truth because their false pride in man's supposed "self-sufficiency" (cf. {96:6-7}) prevents them from accepting the notion of responsibility before a Supreme Being?
20	I.e.. implicitly, by denying the fact of His revelation.
21	I.e., by "spontaneous generation 7, as it were.
22	This is a reductio ad absurdum of their unwillingness to admit the existence of a conscious Primary Cause underlying all creation.
23	I.e., the treasures of His infinite knowledge and power.
24	This is addressed specifically to the pagan contemporaries of the Prophet, implying that "you not only blaspheme by ascribing progeny to God, but you intensify your blasphemy by ascribing to Him something that you yourselves despise, i.e., female offspring": cf. {16:57-59} and the corresponding notes.
25	For an explanation, see note [26] on the identical passage in {68:47}.
26	I.e., it is they who constantly lose themselves in contradictions, whereas the message of the Qur'an is free thereof (cf. {4:82} and the corresponding note).
27	As in {32:21}, the Qur'an stresses here the fact that every evil deed is bound to react in some way or other, even in this world, against him who commits it - either by depriving him of the affection of those who surround him and, thus, deepening his inner loneliness, or, more directly, by creating circumstances which make the achievement of real happiness and satisfaction increasingly impossible.
28	I.e., "under Our protection".

