THE TWELFTH SURAH

YUSUF (JOSEPH)

IN THE NAME OF GOD. THE MOST GRACIOUS' THE DISPENSER OF GRACE:


1	See Appendix II.
2	The participial adjective mabin may denote an attribute of the noun which it qualifies ("clear", "manifest", "obvious", etc.) as well as its function ("making clear" or "manifesting", i.e. the truth), either of which meanings is dictated by its context. In the consensus of authoritative opinion, both these meanings are comprised in the above instance; consequently, a compound phrase is necessary in order to render the term appropriately.
3	This, according to Zamakhshari, is the meaning of la'allakam ta'qilun in the above context. Although they were in the first instance addressed to the Arabian contemporaries of the Prophet, these two verses apply to all people, whatever their origin, who understand the Arabic language. They are meant to impress upon everyone who listens to or reads the Qur'an that its appeal is directed, primarily, to man's reason, and that "feeling" alone can never provide a sufficient basis of faith. (See also {13:37} and {14:4}, as well as the corresponding notes.)
4	Or: "By Our having revealed".
5	Lit., "with the best explanation (ahsan al-iqtisas)". This rendering is very close to the interpretation given by Zamakhshari: "We set forth this Qur'an unto thee in the best way in which it could be set forth." According to Razi, it may safely be assumed that the adjective "best" refers not to the contents of "that which is set forth" - i.e., the particular story narrated in this surah - but rather to the manner in which the Qur'an (or this particular surah) is set forth: and herein he agrees with Zamakhshari. It should be borne in mind that the verb qassa (the infinitive nouns of which are qasas and iqtisas) signifies, primarily, "he followed step by step" or "by degrees", and, subsequently, "he related [a piece of news or a story] as though he followed its traces": hence, "he expounded [it] gradually" or "he explained [it]" (cf. Lane VII, 2526, quoting the Qamus and the Taj al-'Arus with specific reference to the above verse). If, on the other hand, the infinitive noun qasas is regarded as synonymous, in this context, with qis,sah ("story" or "narrative"), the above sentence might be rendered as "We narrate unto thee the best of narratives", i.e., the subsequent story of Joseph. In my opinion, however, the rendering "We explain it [i.e., the Qur'an] in the best possible way" is preferable inasmuch as it fully coincides with the two opening verses of this surah, which state, in effect, that the Qur'an is self-explanatory.
6	At this point in his commentary, Raz' draws the reader's attention to {42:52} "thou didst not know what revelation is, nor what faith [implies]": a passage similar in purport to the closing words of the above verse: hence my addition, between brackets, of the phrase "of what revelation is".
7	The particle idh is usually a time-reference, and can in most cases be translated as "when". Occasionally, however, it is used as a corroborative particle meant to draw the reader's (or hearer's) attention to the sudden occurrence of a thing (Mughni, Qamus, Taj al-'Arus), or-as is often the case in the Qur'an-to a turn in the discourse: and in such instances it is suitably rendered as "lo" or "now".
8	See surah {11}, note [65].
9	As in the Biblical account of Joseph's story, the Qur'an shows that Jacob did not fail to understand the meaning of his son's dream-vision of future greatness, with the eleven stars symbolizing his brothers, and the sun and the moon his parents. But whereas the Bible quotes the father as "rebuking" his son (Genesis xxxvii, 10) in the obvious assumption that the dream was an outcome of wishful thinking, the Qur'an makes it clear that Jacob - who was himself a prophet - at once realized its prophetic quality and its deeper implications.
10	Lit., "sayings" or "tidings" (ahadith). Most of the commentators assume that this refers specifically to Joseph's future ability to interpret dreams; but Razi points out that in this context the term had~th (of which ahadith is the plural) may be synonymous with hadith ("something that newly comes into existence", i.e., "an event" or "a happening"). This is, to my mind, much more convincing than a mere reference to dream-interpretation, the more so as the term ta'wil is often used in the Qur'an (e.g., in {3:7}, {10:39} or {18:78}) in the sense of "final meaning", "inner meaning" or "real meaning" of a happening or statement or thing, as distinct from its outward, prima-facie appearance. The use of the particle min ("of") before the term ta'wil indicates that absolute knowledge of what a thing or event implies rests with God alone (cf. {3:7} - "none save God knows its final meaning"), and that even God's elect, the prophets - albeit their vision is much wider than that of ordinary men - are granted only a partial insight into the mysteries of God's creation.
11	Lit., "those who inquire".
12	Lit., "a company" or "group". Benjamin was Joseph's full brother-both being sons of Jacob's wife Rachel - whereas the other ten were only his half-brothers.
13	Lit., "is in most obvious error".
14	The phrase interpolated by me within brackets - reflecting the unconscious irony in the attitude of Joseph's brethren - is based on the consensus of most of the classical commentators.
15	Sc., "and take him with them to a faraway land" (cf. the preceding verse). The term jubb - rendered by me as "well" - is usually applied to a desert well simply cut through the earth or through rock and not cased with stone: the implication being that this particular well did not contain enough water to drown Joseph, but was deep enough to hide him from sight.
16	See verses {89-90} of this surah.
17	Apparently Jacob did not believe the tale of the wolf but, knowing his sons' envy of Joseph, at once realized that it was they themselves who had done grievous harm to him. Nevertheless - as is evident from Jacob's expression of hope in verse {83} of this surah - he was not quite convinced that Joseph was really dead.
18	Lit., "it is to God that I turn for aid against what you are describing".
19	According to the Bible (Genesis xxxvii, 25), they were "Ishmaelites"-i.e., Arabs-who "came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt". (Gilead is the Biblical name for the region east of the Jordan.)
20	Lit., "O good news!"
21	The Qur'an does not mention his name or position; but a later reference to him (in verse {30} below) as al-'aziz ("the great [or "mighty"] one") points to his having been a high official or a nobleman.
22	See note [10] above.
23	The interpolated phrase "and he would have succumbed", is, according to Zamakhshari, implied in the above sentence. In his commentary on this verse, he further points out that the moral significance of "virtue" consists in one's inner victory over a wrongful desire, and not in the absence of such a desire. Cf. the well-known saying of the Prophet, recorded, on the authority of Abu Hurayrah, by Bukhari and Muslim: "God, exalted be He, says: 'If a servant of Mine [merely] desires to do a good deed, I shall count this [desire] as a good deed; and if he does it, I shall count it tenfold. And if he desires to commit a bad deed, but does not commit it, I shall count this as a good deed, seeing that he refrained from it only for My sake...'" - i.e., in consequence of a moral consideration (which, in the present instance, is described as "an evidence of God's truth").
24	Lit., "he was among Our sincere servants".
25	Lit., "a present one (shahid) from her household testified" - i.e., suggested a test on these lines. Here, again, the Qur'anic narrative differs from the story as told in the Bible, since according to the latter (Genesis xxxix, 19-20), the husband immediately believed the false accusation and cast Joseph into prison; the episodes related in verses {26-34} of this surah do not appear in the Biblical account.
26	Lit., "turn aside from this". According to almost all the commentators, the meaning is, "do not mention this to anyone", the implication being that the husband was prepared to forgive and forget.
27	Lit., "we see her indeed in obvious error".
28	The expression muttaka'- lit., "a place where one reclines [while eating]", i.e., a "cushioned couch" - seems to have been used here tropically to denote a "luxurious [or "sumptuous"] repast".
29	Lit., "they deemed him [i.e.. his beauty] great".
30	Lit., "become one of those who are humiliated".
31	Lit., "incline towards them", it should, however, be borne in mind that the verb saba combines the concepts of inclination, yearning and amorous indulgence (cf. Lane IV, 1649); hence my rendering.
32	Lit., "turned away their guile from him".
33	Lit., "it occurred to them'.
34	Thus, according to the Qur'an, Joseph was imprisoned not because his master believed him to be guilty, but because, in his weakness, he wanted to appease his wife, "being entirely submissive to her, and behaving like a riding-camel whose reins she held in her hand" (Zamakhshari).
35	Lit., "entered the prison with him". According to the Biblical account (not contradicted by the Qur'an), they were the King's cup-bearer and baker, both of them imprisoned for unspecified offences.
36	This is the meaning given by Baghawi, Zamakhshari and Baydawi to the expression al-muhsinin in the above context, adopting the tropical use of the verb ahsana in the sense of "he knew [something]" or "he knew [it] well". Thus, the Qur'an indicates here in its elliptic manner that Joseph's reputation for wisdom and dream-interpretation preceded him to prison.
37	Lit., "the real meaning thereof".
38	Joseph wants to avail himself of this opportunity to guide his two fellow-prisoners towards the true faith; and so, while promising that he would explain their dreams presently, he asks them to listen first to a short discourse on the oneness of God.
39	Since God is almighty and self-sufficient, it is not for His sake that man is warned not to ascribe divine qualities to aught beside Him: the absolute condemnation of this sin is solely designed to benefit man by freeing him from all superstition, and thus enhancing his dignity as a conscious, rational being.
40	Lit., "better", obviously in the sense of "better conforming to the demands of reason".
41	The expression mutafarriqan connotes plurality as well as separateness-in this context, separateness in respect of qualities, functions and degrees.
42	Lit., "names which you have named" - i.e., "figments of your own imagination".
43	Cf. the last sentence of {30:30}.
44	This king seems to have been one of the six Hyksos rulers who dominated Egypt from about 1700 to 1580 B.C., after having invaded the country from the east by way of the Sinai Peninsula. The name of this dynasty, which was undoubtedly of foreign origin, is derived from the Egyptian hiq shasu or heku shoswet, meaning "rulers of nomad lands", or - according to the late Egyptian historian Manetho - "shepherd kings": all of which points to their having been Arabs who, despite the fact that before their invasion of Egypt they were already well-established in Syria, had to a large extent preserved their bedouin mode of life. This would explain the confidence which the king mentioned in this story was later to place in Joseph, the Hebrew, and the subsequent settlement of the latter's family (and, thus, of what in due course became the Israelite nation) in Egypt: for it must be borne in mind that the Hebrews, too, descended from one of the many bedouin tribes who some centuries earlier had migrated from the Arabian Peninsula to Mesopotamia and later to Syria (cf. surah {7}, note [48]); and that the language of the Hyksos must have been very akin to Hebrew, which, after all, is but an ancient Arabian dialect.
45	Lit., "confusing medleys (adghath) of dreams".
46	According to almost all the authorities, the noun ummah denotes here "a time" or "a long period of time".
47	The cup-bearer obviously addresses the assembly as a whole, and not the King alone: hence the plural "you".
48	Or: "will be granted rain" - depending on whether one connects the verbal form yughath with either of the infinitive nouns ghayth ("rain") or ghawth ("deliverance from distress"). Although the crops of Egypt depend entirely on the annual Nile floods, the water-level of the river is, in its turn, contingent upon the quantity of rainfall at its upper reaches.
49	Evidently, the King wanted to find out whether they had previously been encouraged by Joseph, or whether he was truly innocent. The noun khatb denotes "something that one has in view" or "desires" or "seeks to obtain"; and so the expression ma khatbukunna (lit., "what was it that you [really] had in view") may be suitably rendered as above.
50	Lit., "the wife of the great one (al-'aziz)".
51	Some of the commentators (e.g., Ibn Kathir and, among the moderns, Rashid Rida' in Manar XII, 323 f.) regard this and the next verse as a continuation of the woman's confession; but the great majority of the classical authorities, including Tabari, Baghawi and Zamakhshari attribute the speech that follows unequivocally - and, in my opinion, most convincingly - to Joseph: hence my interpolation at the beginning of this verse.
52	Lit., "in [his] absence" or "in secret" (bi'l-ghayb).
53	Lit., "is indeed wont to command [the doing of] evil" - i.e., is filled with impulses which often conflict with what the mind regards as a moral good. This is obviously a reference to the statement in verse {24} above - "she desired him, and he desired her; [and he would have succumbed,] had he not seen [in this temptation] an evidence of his Sustainer's truth" - as well as to Joseph's prayer in verse {33}, "unless Thou turn away their guile from me, I might yet yield to their allure". (See also note [23] above.) Joseph's stress on the weakness inherent in human nature is a sublime expression of humility on the part of one who himself had overcome that very weakness: for, as the sequence shows, he attributes his moral victory not to himself but solely to the grace and mercy of God.
54	Lit., "except those upon whom...", etc. According to most of the commentators, the pronoun ma (lit., "that which") is here synonymous with man ("he who" or "those who").
55	By making this request, Joseph wanted to assure an efficient build-up of grain reserves during the coming years of plenty, knowing well that they would be followed by seven years of scarcity. It is obvious from the sequence that his request was granted, and that he was able to fulfil the task which he had set himself.
56	I.e., sometimes in this world as well, but invariably in the hereafter, as the sequence shows.
57	Lit., "for those who have attained to faith...", etc.
58	I.e., to buy wheat from the stores which Joseph had accumulated during the seven years of plenty: for all the countries in the vicinity of Egypt were by now affected by the famine which he had predicted, and Egypt alone had a surplus, the distribution of which he supervised personally (cf. Genesis xii, 54-57).
59	Lit., "a brother of yours from your father" - i.e., their half-brother Benjamin, who was Joseph's full brother (their mother having been Rachel, Jacob's favourite wife), whereas the other ten had different mothers. Benjamin, the youngest of Jacob's children, had not accompanied his brothers on their first journey to Egypt, but they had presumably mentioned him in the course of their conversation with Joseph.
60	I.e., the goods which they had bartered for wheat (Ibn Kathir): a very plausible explanation in view of the fact that barter was the most common form of trade in those ancient times.
61	Lit., "so that they may perceive them when they come back to their family, [and] that they may return".
62	Lit., "measure [of grain]", here used metonymically in an allusion to Joseph's words (verse {60}).
63	Lit., "not otherwise than".
64	It would seem that Joseph used to allot to foreign buyers of grain one camel-load per person.
65	Probably in order not to attract undue attention in the foreign land and possibly fall prey to intrigues. See in this connection note [68] below.
66	Lit., "when".
67	As is shown in the sequence, they and their father were to suffer severe distress before their adventures came to a happy conclusion.
68	Lit., "it [i.e., his request that they should enter the city by different gates] had been but a desire in Jacob's heart (nais), which he [thus] satisfied". In other words, when he gave his sons this advice, he followed only an instinctive, humanly-understandable urge, and did not really expect that any outward precaution would by itself help them: for, as he himself pointed out on parting, "judgment as to what is to happen rests with none but God". This stress on man's utter dependence on God - a fundamental tenet of Islam - explains why Jacob's advice (which in itself is not relevant to the story) has been mentioned in the above Qur'anic narrative.
69	This interpolated clause is based on Zamakhshari's interpretation of the above reference to Jacob's having been "endowed with knowledge".
70	Thus, contrary to the Biblical account, Joseph is stated here to have disclosed his identity to Benjamin long before he revealed himself to his ten half-brothers. The words "their past doings" obviously refer to their treacherous behaviour towards himself which Joseph had now presumably disclosed to Benjamin.
71	Lit.. "an announcer" (mu'adhdhin) - a noun derived from the verbal form adhdhana("he announced" or "proclaimed" or "called out publicly").
72	Commenting on this verse, Razi says: "Nowhere in the Qur'an is it stated that they made this accusation on Joseph's orders; the circumstantial evidence shows rather (al-aqrab ila zahir al-hal) that they did this of their own accord: for, when they had missed the drinking-cup, [these servants of Joseph remembered that] nobody had been near it [except the sons of Jacob], and so it occurred to them that it was they who had taken it." Analogous views are also advanced by Tabari and Zamakhshari in their comments on the last words of verse {76} below. This extremely plausible explanation contrasts sharply with the Biblical account of this incident (Genesis xliv), according to which the false accusation was part of an inexplicable "stratagem" devised by Joseph. If we discard - as we must - this part of the Biblical version, it is far more logical to assume that Joseph who had been granted by the King full authority over all that belonged to the latter (see verse {56} above), had placed the royal cup as a present in the bag of his favourite brother; and that he did this secretly, without informing his servants, because he did not want anyone, least of all his ten half-brothers, to know his predilection for Benjamin. For a further explanation of this incident and of its ethical relevance within the context of Joseph's story, see note [77] below.
73	Lit.. "They said. turninE towards them".
74	Most of the commentators (relying, perhaps on Exodus xxii, 3) assume that this was the customary punishment for theft among the ancient Hebrews. Razi, however, suggests that this last sentence may not be a part of the brothers' answer but a confirmatory remark made by the Egyptian herald, meaning, "[In fact,] thus do we [Egyptians] requite the doers of such wrong".
75	Lit., "with their bags".
76	Lit., "he brought it out".
77	The meaning of this story is now clear: it is a further illustration of the basic doctrine that "judgment [as to what is to happen] rests with none but God" (verse {67} above). Joseph had wanted to keep Benjamin with himself, but under the law of Egypt he could not do this without the consent of his half-brothers, who were the legal guardians of their minor brother; and they - bound as they were by the solemn promise given to their father - would certainly not have agreed to Benjamin's remaining behind. The only other alternative open to Joseph was to disclose his identity to them; but since he was not yet prepared to go so far, he was obliged to allow Benjamin to depart with his brothers. The accidental discovery of his gift, entirely unexpected by Joseph (see note [72] above), changed everything: for now Benjamin appeared to be guilty of theft, and under the law of the land Joseph was entitled to claim him as his slave, and thus to keep him in his house. The words, "In this way did We contrive (kidna) for Joseph [the attainment of his heart's desire]", referring to the incident of the cup, indicate that its final outcome was neither planned nor even foreseen by Joseph.
78	The reference is obviously to Benjamin's full brother, Joseph. In the absence of any indication that the latter had ever before been accused of theft, it is reasonable to assume that the brothers, unaware of the fact that they were standing before Joseph, simply wanted to vilify him in order to dissociate themselves more effectively from Benjamin, who now appeared to have been convicted of theft.
79	Lit., "Joseph concealed it within himself and did not reveal it to them; he said...", etc According to almost all the commentators, the pronoun "it" refers to Joseph's subsequent "saying" or, rather, thought, indicated by the verb "he said" (i.e., within himself); hence my free renderina of this phrase.
80	Lit., "of what you attribute", i.e., to Joseph and Benjamin - sc., "since you yourselves have stolen Joseph from his father".
81	Lit., "know"-but since this expression denotes here remembrance rather than knowledge in the proper sense of the word. it can be suitably translated as above.
82	I.e., "enables me to win back my brother Benjamin".
83	I.e., the finding of the King's cup in Benjamin's bag (Baghawi and Zamakhshari).
84	Lit., "We were not guardians over that which was beyond the reach of [our] perception": i.e., "at the time when we gave you our pledge regarding Benjamin, we did not know that he would steal" (Zamakhshari).
85	I.e., Benjamin and the eldest son (who had remained in Egypt) as well as Joseph, of whose alleged death Jacob was never fully convinced (cf. note [17]).
86	Lit., "white": i.e., dim with the tears that filled them (Razi). Although Jacob was now deprived of three of his sons, his grief for Joseph was the most acute because he was the only one of the three of whom Jacob did not know whether he was dead or alive.
87	Namely, that "judgment as to what is to happen rests with none but God", and that "all who have trust [in His existence] must place their trust in Him alone" (verse {67}): the twin ideas which underlie the whole of this surah, and which Jacob now seeks to impress upon his sons. In addition to this, his remembrance of Joseph's prophetic dream (verse {4}) and his own conviction at the time that his beloved son would be elected by God for His special grace (verse {6}), fills Jacob with renewed hope that Joseph is still alive (Razi and Ibn Kathir): and this explains the directives which he gives his sons in the next sentence.
88	According to most of the commentators, especially Ibn 'Abbas (as quoted by Tabari and others), the term rawh is here synonymous with rahmah ("grace" or "mercy"). Since it is linguistically related to the noun ruh ("breath of life" or "spirit"), and has also the metonymic significance of "rest" (rahah) from grief and sadness (Taj al-'Arus), the most appropriate rendering would seem to be "life-giving mercy".
89	I.e., goods which they intended to barter for grain (see note [60] above).
90	Lit., "know" (see note [81]).
91	By coupling his own name with that of Benjamin he possibly hinted at his brothers' early envy and hatred of the two sons of Rachel (cf. verse {8} of this surah and the corresponding note [12]); alternatively, the mention of Benjamin may have been due to the readiness with which they accepted the "evidence" of the latter's guilt (verse {77}).
92	Lit., "whoever is...", etc.
93	Lit., "he will become seeing [again]" - i.e., "he will cease to weep for me and the dimness of his sight caused by unhappiness and constant weeping will disappear on learning that I am alive": thus may be summed up Razi's explanation of the above sentence. According to him, there is no compelling reason to assume that Jacob had become really blind from grief. - The phrase "lay it over my father's face" could also be rendered as "lay it before my father", since the term wajh (lit., "face") is often used in classical Arabic to denote, metonymically, one's whole personality, or whole being.
94	Lit., "had departed", i.e., from Egypt.
95	See verse {86} above.
96	According to the Biblical account - not contradicted by the Qur'an - Joseph's mother Rachel had died while giving birth to Benjamin. We may, therefore, assume that the "mother" implied in the term "parents" was another of Jacob's wives, who had brought up Joseph and Benjamin; this would be in consonance with the ancient Arabian custom of applying the designation "mother" to a foster-mother.
97	Lit., "onto the throne (al-'arsh)", in the metaphorical sense of this word.
98	According to 'Abd Allah ibn 'Abbas (as quoted by Razi), the personal pronoun in "before Him" relates to God, since it is inconceivable that Joseph would have allowed his parents to prostrate themselves before himself.
99	The fulfilment of Joseph's childhood dream consisted in the high dignity with which he was now invested and in the fact that his parents and his brothers had come from Canaan to Egypt for his sake: for "no reasonable person can expect that the fulfilment of a dream should be an exact replica of the dream itself" (Razi, alluding to the symbolic prostration of the eleven stars, the sun and the moon mentioned in verse {4} of this surah).
100	As regards my rendering of latif as "unfathomable", see surah {6}, note [89]. In the present instance, this term supplies a further accent, as it were, on the theme "judgment as to what is to happen rests with none but God" (verse {67}).
101	Lit., "of dominion", indicating that absolute power and absolute dominion belong to God alone.
102	See note [10] on verse {6} of this surah.
103	Lit., "with them".
104	It is impossible to render the expression 'ala basirah in a more concise manner. Derived from the verb basura or basira ("he became seeing" or "he saw"), the noun basirah (as also the verb) has the abstract connotation of "seeing with one's mind": and so it signifies "the faculty of understanding based on conscious insight" as well as, tropically, "an evidence accessible to the intellect" or "verifiable by the intellect". Thus, the "call to God" enunciated by the Prophet is described here as the outcome of a conscious insight accessible to, and verifiable by, man's reason: a statement which circumscribes to perfection the Qur'anic approach to all questions of faith, ethics and morality, and is echoed many times in expressions like "so that you might use your reason" (la'allakam ta'qilun), or "will you not, then, use your reason?" (a fa-la ta'qilun), or "so that they might understand [the truth]" (la'allahum yafqahun), or "so that you might think" (la'allakum tatafakkarun); and, finally, in the oft-repeated declaration that the message of the Qur'an as such is meant specifically "for people who think" (li-qawmin yatafakkarun).
105	This is an answer to the objection often raised by unbelievers that a mortal like themselves could not have been entrusted with God's message to man.
106	Lit., "until" (hatta). This connects with the reference to earlier apostles in the first sentence of the preceding verse: the implication being (according to Zamakhshari) that they used to suffer for a long time before they were vindicated by God.
107	Lit., "thought that they had been given the lie" - i.e., either by their people, who regarded the apostles' expectation of God's succour as mere wishful thinking, or by the harsh reality which seemed to contradict those apostles' own hopes of speedy help from God (Zamakhshari). Commenting on this verse,'Abd Allah ibn'Abbas used to quote {2:214} - "so shaken were they that the apostle, and the believers with him, would exclaim, When will God s succour come? (ibid.)
108	Lit., in their stories -i.e., the stories of the prophets.
109	I.e., the Qur an as a whole (Baghawi and Zamakhshari). The passage that follows connects with verses {102-105}.
110	Lit., but - denoting here the impossibility of its having been invented by Muhammad.
111	I.e., everything that man may need for his spiritual welfare. See also {10:37} and the corresponding note [60]
