SURAH 25
AL FURQAN (THE STANDARD OF TRUE AND FALSE)

1	Almost all the commentators give this meaning to the term al-furqan. In the above context it denotes the Qur'an as well as the phenomenon of divine revelation as such. (For an amplified interpretation of this term by Muhammad 'Abduh, see note [38] on {2:53}.) The verbal form nazzala implies gradualness both in time ("successively") and in method ("step by step").
2	See note [133] on {17:111}.
3	I.e., in accordance with the function assigned by Him to each individual thing or phenomenon: cf. the oldest formulation of this idea in {87:2-3}.
4	I.e., whether they be inanimate "representations" of imaginary deities, or personified forces of nature or deified human beings. or simplv figments of the imagination.
5	Implying that the Qur'an, or most of it, is based on Judaeo-Christian teachings allegedly communicated to Muhammad by some unnamed foreigners (cf. {16:103} and the corresponding notes, especially note [130]) or, alternatively, by various Arab converts to Judaism or Christianity; furthermore, that Muhammad had either deceived himself into believing that the Qur'an was a divine revelation, or had deliberately - knowing that it was not so - attributed it to God.
6	Lit., "and thus, indeed, have they come with [or "brought"] a perversion of the truth" [which obviously is the meaning of zalm in this context] "and a falsehood". Whereas it is generally assumed that this clause constitutes a Qur'anic rebuttal of the malicious allegation expressed in the preceding clause, I am of the opinion that it forms part of that allegation, making the mythical "helpers" of Muhammad co-responsible, as it were, for the "invention" of the Qur'an.
7	Because it was known to his contemporaries that he was unlettered (ummi) and could not read and write.
8	A sarcastic allusion to the "gardens of paradise" of which the Qur'an so often speaks. (Cf. {13:38} and the corresponding notes [74] and [75]; also {5:75} and {21:7-8}.)
9	Lit., "When it shall see them from a far-off place": a metaphorical allusion, it would seem, to the moment of their death on earth. As in many other instances, we are given here a subtle verbal hint of the allegorical nature of the Qur'anic descriptions of conditions in the life to come by a rhetorical "transfer" of man's faculty of seeing to the object of his seeing: a usage which Zamakhshari explicitly characterizes as metaphorical ('ala sabil al-majaz).
10	For a tentative explanation of the allegory of the sinners' being "linked together" in hell, see my note [64] on {14:49}. As regards the "tight space" into which they will be flung, Zamakhshari remarks: "Distress is accompanied by [a feeling of] constriction, just as happiness is accompanied by [a feeling of] spaciousness; and because of this, God has described paradise as being 'as vast as the heavens and the earth' [{3:133}]."
11	Although the concept of "extinction" (thubur) implies finality and is, therefore, unrepeatable, the sinners' praying for "many extinctions" is used here as a metonym for their indescribable suffering and a corresponding, indescribable desire for a final escape.
12	This passage connects elliptically with verse {3} above.
13	The rhetorical "question" which follows is obviously addressed to wrongfully deified rational beings - i.e., prophets or saints - and not, as some commentators assume, to lifeless idols which, as it were, "will be made to speak".
14	Sc., "and so it would have been morally impossible for us to ask others to worship us". On the other hand, Ibn Kathir understands the expression "for us" (lana) as denoting "us human beings" in general, and not merely the speakers - in which case the sentence could be rendered thus: "It is not right for us [human beings] to take...", etc. In either case, the above allegorical "question-and-answer" - repeated in many variations throughout the Qur'an - is meant to stress, in a dramatic manner, the moral odiousness and intellectual futility of attributing divine qualities to any being other than God.
15	This is the meaning of hatta (lit., "till" or "until") in the present context.
16	This elliptic passage undoubtedly alludes to the fact that the appearance of each new prophet had, as a rule, a twofold purpose: firstly, to convey a divinely-inspired ethical message to man, and thus to establish a criterion of right and wrong or a standard by which to discern the true from the false (al-furqan, as stated in the first verse of this surah); and, secondly, to be a means of testing men's moral perceptions and dispositions as manifested in their reactions to the prophet's message - that is, their willingness or unwillingness to accept it on the basis of its intrinsic merit without demanding or even expecting any "supernatural" proof of its divine origin. Indirectly, in its deepest sense, this passage implies that not only a prophet but every human being is, by virtue of his social existence, a means whereby the moral qualities of his fellow-men are put to a test: hence, some of the earliest commentators (among them Tabari) give to the above phrase the connotation of "We caused you human beings to be a means of testing one another".
17	I.e., "you men" or, more specifically, "you whom the message of the Qur'an has reached".
18	Lit., "who do not hope for [i.e., expect] a meeting with Us": the implication being that they do not believe in resurrection and, consequently, do not expect to be judged by God in after-life.
19	I.e., on Judgment Day, when "all will have been decided" (cf. {6:8}).
20	Lit.. "will be happiest as regards their abode, and best as regards their place of repose".
21	Lit., "taken a path with the apostle". The terms "the apostle" and "the evildoer" are here obviously used in their generic sense, applying to all of God's apostles and all who consciously reject their guidance. Similarly, the expression "so-and-so" (fulan) occurring in the next verse circumscribes any person or personified influence responsible for leading a human being astray.
22	For the implication of the term "Satan" as used here, see note [10] on {2:14}, first half of note [16] on {15:17}, as well as note [31] on {14:22}.
23	My interpolation of the words "on that Day" and the (linguistically permissible) attribution of futurity to the past-tense verb qala is based on the identical interpretation of the above phrase by great commentators like Abu Muslim (as quoted by Razi) or Baghawi.
24	I.e., as mere wishful thinking and, therefore, of no account, or as something that in the course of time has "ceased to be relevant". Since many of those whom the message of the Qur'an has reached did and do regard it as a divine revelation and therefore as most "relevant" in every sense of the word, it is obvious that the expression "my people" cannot possibly denote here all of the Prophet's community (either in the national or in the ideological sense of this word), but signifies only such of his nominal followers as have lost all real faith in the Qur'anic message: hence the necessity of interpolating the (elliptically implied) words "some of" before "my people".
25	Cf. {6: 112}, which refers in very similar terms to the evil forces (shayatin) against which every prophet has had to contend. The "glittering half-truths meant to delude the mind" spoken of in that verse are exemplified in the present passage, prophetically, by the deceptive argument that the Qur'an, having been enunciated fourteen centuries ago, must now be considered "obsolete".
26	Lit., "in one piece" or "as one statement" (jumlatan wahidatan) - implying, in the view of the opponents of Islam, that the gradual, step-by-step revelation of the Qur'an points to its having been "composed" by Muhammad to suit his changing personal and political requirements. 
27	I.e., free of all inner contradictions (cf. {4:82}). See also {39:23}, where the Qur'an is spoken of as "fully consistent within itself". The concise phrase rattalnahu tartilan comprises the parallel concepts of "putting the component parts [of a thing] together and arranging them well" as well as "endowing it with inner consistency". Inasmuch as full consistency and freedom from contradictions in a message spread over twenty-three years of a life as full of movement and drama as that of the Prophet does give a clear indication of its God-inspired quality, it is bound to strengthen the faith of every thinking believer: and herein lies, according to the Qur'an itself, the deepest reason for its slow, gradual revelation. (When applied to the reciting of the Qur'an - as in {73:4} - the term tartil refers to the measured diction and the thoughtful manner in which it ought to be enunciated.)
28	Lit., "come to thee with a parable (mathal)" - i.e., with all manner of seemingly plausible parabolic objections (exemplified in verses {7-8}, {21} and {32} of this surah as well as in many other places in the Qur'an) meant to throw doubt on Muhammad's claim to prophethood and, hence, on the God-inspired character of the Qur'anic message.
29	Sc., "of the problem or problems involved": an allusion to the self-explanatory character of the Qur'an. Throughout this section (verses {30-34}) the personal pronoun "thou" (in the forms "thy" and "thee") relates not only to the Prophet but also to every one of his followers at all times.
30	I.e., in utter spiritual abasement (Razi, mentioning some other commentators as well).
31	Cf. {17:72} and the corresponding note [87].
32	For this rendering of the term wazlr, see note [18] on {20:29}. The mention, at this place, of Moses and Aaron - and of Noah, etc., in the following verses - is intended to remind us of the statement in verse {31} above that "against every prophet We have set up enemies from among those who are lost in sin".
33	Regarding the tribes of 'Ad and Thamud, see surah {7}, notes [48] and [56]. As for Ar-Rass, a town of that name exists to this day in the Central-Arabian province of Al-Qasim; in the ancient times referred to it seems to have been inhabited by descendants of the Nabataean tribe of Thamud (Tabari). There is, however, no agreement among the commentators as to the real meaning of this name or designation; Razi cites several of the current, conflicting interpretations and rejects all of them as purely conjectural.
34	Sc., "which they failed to heed". For my rendering of mathal, in this context, as "lesson", see note [104] on {17:89}.
35	A reference to Sodom and its destruction by a rain of "stone-hard blows of chastisement pre-ordained" (see {11:82} and the corresponding note [114]). The phrase "they have come across" may be understood in either of two ways: (a) in its literal sense of "chancing upon" or "passing by", in which case it applies to the Prophet's contemporaries and opponents, the pagan Meccans, whose customary caravan route to Syria passed close by the Dead Sea and the probable site of Sodom and Gomorrah; or (b) in the tropical sense of "becoming aware [of something]" through reading or hearsay - in which case it may be taken to refer to people of all times, and to the fact that the story of Sodom and Gomorrah is part and parcel of mankind's moral heritage.
36	Lit., "they were wont not to look forward to [i.e., to expect or believe in] resurrection".
37	Lit., "they are farther astray from the path [of truth]": see note [144] on {7:179}.
38	I.e., "We cause it to contract in accordance with the 'laws of nature' which We Ourselves have instituted." As in so many other instances in the Qur'an, the abrupt change from the third-person pronoun "He" to "We" is meant to illustrate the fact that God is undefinable, and that it is only the inadequacy of human speech - and, hence, of the human mind - that makes it necessary to refer to the Supreme Being by pronouns which in relaity are applicable only to finite, created "persons" (cf. Foreword, note [2]).
39	Lit., "have We turned it over (sarrafnahu) among them": a reference to the frequent many-faceted reiteration, in the Qur'an as well as in earlier revelations, of all the evidence unmistakably pointing to the existence of a conscious Creator (Zamakhshari).
40	Sc., "but We have willed instead that Muhammad be Our last prophet and, hence, a warner unto all people for all times to come".
41	The noun bahr, usually signifying "sea", is also applied to large agglomerations of sweet water, like rivers, lakes, etc.; in the above context, the dual al-bahrayn denotes "the two great bodies [or "kinds"] of water" - the salty and the sweet - existing side by side on earth.
42	I.e., has caused them - as if by an invisible barrier - to remain distinct in kind despite their continuous meeting and mingling in the oceans: an indirect reminder of God's planning creativeness inherent in the cyclic transformation of water - its evaporation from the salty seas, followed by a formation of clouds, their condensation into rain and snow which feed springs and rivers, and its return to the seas. Some Muslim mystics see in this stress on the two kinds of water an allegory of the gulf - and, at the same time, interaction - between man's spiritual perceptions, on the one hand, and his worldly needs and passions, on the other.
43	See second half of {21:30} where the creation of "every living thing out of water" is spoken of, as well as {24:45}, which mentions in this connection the entire animal world (including, of course, man).
44	I.e., has enabled him to attribute spiritual value to, and to derive strength from, his organic and social relationships.
45	Lit., "they".
46	See note [43] on the first sentence of {7:54}.
47	I.e., "ask God Himself": since He alone holds the keys to the mysteries of the universe, it is only by observing His creation and listening to His revealed messages that man can obtain a glimpse, however distant, of God's Own reality.
48	See {10:5}, where the sun if spoken of as "a [source of] radiant light", explained in the corresponding note [10]. For my rendering of buruj as "great constellations", see note [15] on {15:16}.
49	Lit., "or" (aw) - a particle which obviously does not denote here an alternative but, rather, an explanatory amplification, similar to the expression "in other words".
50	Sc., "with the aim to ridicule them or to argue against their beliefs".
51	In the Qur'an, the verb anfaqa (and the corresponding noun nafaqah) has usually this connotation.
52	See surah {6}, note [148].
53	Lit., "he who does that (dhalika)", i.e., any of the three sins referred to in this verse. (For my translation of zina as "adultery", see surah {24}, note [2].)
54	Implying that neither do they themselves ever bear false witness (i.e., in the widest sense of this expression, tell any lie), nor do they knowingly take part in anything that is based on falsehood (Razi).
55	Explaining this verse, Zamakhshari remarks that whereas the average run of people approach the divine writ with a mere outward show of eagerness, "throwing themselves upon it" for the sake of appearances but, in reality, not making the least attempt to understand the message as such and, hence, remaining deaf and blind to its contents - the truly God-conscious are deeply desirous of understanding it, and therefore "listen to it with wide-awake ears and look into it with seeing eyes".
56	I.e., by living a righteous life.
57	Lit., “were it not for your prayer”, which term Ibn 'Abbas (as quoted by Tabari) equates in this context with “faith”.
58	I.e., “unless you repent, this sin will determine your spiritual destiny in the life to come”.
