THE TWENTY-THIRD SURAH
AL-MU'MINUN (THE BELIEVERS)

1	Lit., "working for" or "active in behalf of [inner] purity", which is the meaning of zakah in this context (Zamakhshari; the same interpretation has been advanced by Abu Muslim).
2	Lit., "who guard their private parts".
3	Lit., "or those whom their right hands possess" (aw ma malakat aymanuhum). Most of the commentators assume unquestioningly that this relates to female slaves, and that the particle aw ("or") denotes a permissible alternative. This conventional interpretation is, in my opinion inadmissible inasmuch as it is based on the assumption that sexual intercourse with one's female slave is permitted without marriage: an assumption which is contradicted by the Qur'an itself (see {4:3}, {24}, {25} and {24:32}, with the corresponding notes). Nor is this the only objection to the above-mentioned interpretation. Since the Qur'an applies the term "believers" to men and women alike, and since the term azwaj ("spouses"), too, denotes both the male and the female partners in marriage, there is no reason for attributing to the phrase aw ma malakat aymanuhum the meaning of "their female slaves"; and since, on the other hand, it is out of the question that female and male slaves could have been referred to here, it is obvious that this phrase does not relate to slaves at all, but has the same meaning as in {4:24}- namely, "those whom they rightfully possess through wedlock" (see note [26] on {4:24}) - with the significant difference that in the present context this expression relates to both husbands and wives, who "rightfully possess" one another by virtue of marriage. On the basis of this interpretation, the particle aw which precedes this clause does not denote an alternative ("or") but is, rather, in the nature of an explanatory amplification, more or less analgous to the phrase "in other words" or "that is", thus giving to the whole sentence the meaning, "...save with their spouses - that is, those whom they rightfully possess [through wedlock]...", etc. (Cf. a similar construction 25:62 - "for him who has the will to take thought - that is [lit., "or"], has the will to be grateful".)
4	The frequent Qur'anic references to man's being "created out of clay" or "out of dust" or (as in this instance) "out of the essence (sulalah) of clay" point to the fact that his body is composed of various organic and inorganic substances existing on or in the earth, as well as to the continuous transmutation of those substances, through the intake of earth-grown food, into reproductive cells (Razi) - thus stressing man's humble origin, and hence the debt of gratitude which he owes to God for having endowed him with a conscious soul. The past tense in verses {12-14} (lit., "We have created", "We have caused him to remain", etc.) emphasizes the fact that all this has been ordained by God and has been happening again and again ever since man was brought into being by Him; in the above context, this recurrence is brought out best by the use of the present tense.
5	Lit., "as another creature", i.e., existing independently of the mother's body.
6	Lit., "the best of creators". As Tabari points out, the Arabs apply the designation "creator" to every artisan (sani') - a usage also current in European languages with reference to the "creation" of works of art and imagination. Since God is the only Creator in the real, primary sense of this word, the phrase ahsan al-khaliqin must be understood in this secondary sense of the term khaliq (cf. Taj al-'Arus, art. khalaqa).
7	Lit., "seven paths", which may signify the orbits of the visible planets or - as the classical commentators assume - the "seven heavens" (i.e., cosmic systems) repeatedly spoken of in the Qur'an. In either case, the number "seven" is used metonymically, indicating multiplicity. See in this connection note [20] on {2:29}.
8	I.e., the olive-tree, native to the lands around the eastern Mediterranean, where so many pre-Qur'anic prophets (here symbolized - because of its sacred associations - by Mount Sinai) lived and preached.
9	Lit., "of them".
10	Sc., "who had lost sight of all the multiform evidence of the Creator's uniqueness and, thus, all gratitude for the innumerable blessings which He bestows upon man".
11	Lit., "in connection with (fi) our early forebears" - a Qur'anic allusion to the fact that people often reject a new ethical proposition on no better grounds than that it conflicts with their "inherited" habits of thought and ways of life. Indirectly, this allusion implies a condemnation of all blind taqlid, i.e., an unthinking acceptance of religious doctrines or assertions which are not unequivocally supported by divine revelation, the explicit teachings of a prophet, or the evidence of unprejudiced reason.
12	I.e., "under Our protection".
13	Regarding this interpolation, see surah {11}, note [60]. For an explanation of the passage that follows, see {11:40} and the corresponding notes [62-64]. The reason for the (abbreviated) repetition of Noah's story - given in much greater detail in {11:25-48}- becomes evident from verse {29).
14	Lit., "Cause me to alight with a blessed alighting" - i.e., in a blessed condition of alighting, or at a blessed place of alighting (Tabari); both these meanings are implied in the word "destination".
15	Lit., "the best of all who cause [man] to alight", i.e., at his true destination. In this prayer enjoined upon Noah - and, by implication, on every believer - the story of the ark is raised to symbolic significance: it reveals itself as a parable of the human soul's longing for divine illumination, which alone can show man how to save himself and to reach his true destination in the realm of the spirit as well as in worldly life.
16	Lit., "a generation (-qarn) of others". For a wider meaning of the term -qarn, see surah {6}, note [5].
17	Most of the classical commentators assume that the apostle referred to in verses {32-41} is Hud, the prophet of the tribe of 'Ad (see surah {7}, note [48]). Since, however, this passage contains elements appearing in the stories of many prophets - including that of the Prophet Muhammad - I am of the opinion that it has a general import: namely, an allusion to all of God's apostles and to the ever-recurring similarity of their experiences.
18	Thus Tabari interprets the concise but meaningful phrase atrafnahum fi'l-,hayati 'd-dunya. For a fuller explanation of the verb tarifa, see note [147] on {11:116}.
19	Lit., "they will surely become of those who feel remorse".
20	The expression bi'l-haqq (lit., "in accordance with truth" or "with justice") combines in this instance the concepts of justice, wisdom, reality, inescapability, and consonance with the exigencies of the case under consideration (Raghib), and can be only approximately rendered in translation.
21	Lit., "generations of others", i.e., new civilizations.
22	See note [5] on the identical phrase in {15:5}.
23	Moses and Aaron are mentioned here by name because their case was different from that of all other prophets: they were rejected not by their own community but by their community's oppressors.
24	Lit., "became of those who were destroyed".
25	For my rendering of the ayah, in this instance, as "symbol", see surah {19}, note [16].  Jesus and his mother Mary are mentioned here specifically because they, too, had to suffer persecution and slander at the hands of "those who were bent on denying the truth".
26	I.e., in paradise. The expression ma'in signifies "unsullied springs" or "running waters" (Ibn 'Abbas, as quoted by Tabari; also Lisan al-'Arab and Taj al-'Arus), and thus symbolizes the spiritual purity associated with the concept of paradise, the "gardens through which running waters flow".
27	This rhetorical apostrophe to all of God's apostles is meant to stress their humanness and mortality, and thus to refute the argument of the unbelievers that God could not have chosen "a mortal like ourselves" to be His message-bearer: an argument which overlooks the fact that only human beings who themselves "partake of the good things of life" are able to understand the needs and motives of their fellow-men and, thus, to guide them in their spiritual and social concerns.
28	As in {21:92}, the above verse is addressed to all who truly believe in God, whatever their historical denomination. By the preceding reference to all of God's apostles the Qur'an clearly implies that all of them were inspired by, and preached, the same fundamental truths, notwithstanding all the differences in the ritual or the specific laws which they propounded in accordance with the exigencies of the time and the social development of their followers. (See notes [66-68] on the second paragraph of {5:48}.)
29	Cf. {21:93}.
30	Lit.; "in what they have [themselves]". In the first instance, this verse refers to the various religious groups as such: that is to say, to the followers of one or another of the earlier revelations who, in the course of time, consolidated themselves within different "denominations", each of them jealously guarding its own set of tenets, dogmas and rituals and intensely intolerant of all other ways of worship (manasik, see {22:67}). In the second instance, however, the above condemnation applies to the breach of unity within each of the established religious groups; and since it applies to the followers of all the prophets, it includes the latter-day followers of Muhammad as well, and thus constitutes a prediction and condemnation of the doctrinal disunity prevailing in the world of Islam in our times -cf. the well-authenticated saying of the Prophet quoted by Ibn Hanbal, Abu Da'ud, Tirmidhi, and Darimi: "The Jews have been split up into seventy-one sects, the Christians into seventy-two sects, whereas my community will be split up into seventy-three sects." (It should be remembered that in classical Arabic usage the number "seventy" often stands for "many" - just as "seven" stands for "several" or "various" - and does not necessarily denote an actual figure; hence, what the Prophet meant to say was that the sects and divisions among the Muslims of later days would become many, and even more numerous than those among the Jews and the Christians.
31	I.e., until they themselves realize their error. This sentence is evidently addressed to the last of the apostles, Muhammad, and thus to all who truly follow him.
32	I.e., "Do they think that by bestowing on them worldly prosperity God but wants them to vie with one another in their race after material goods and comforts, which they mistakenly identify with 'doing good works'?" Another - linguistically permissible - rendering of the above two verses would be: "Do they think that by all the wealth and offspring with which We provide them We [but] hasten on [the coming] to them of all that is good?" Either of these two renderings implies, firstly, that worldly prosperity is not the ultimate good, and, secondly, that the breach of the unity spoken of in the preceding passage was, more often than not, an outcome of mere worldly greed and of factional striving after power.
33	This is an allusion to the giving of what one is morally obliged to give, whether it be in charity or in satisfaction of rightful claims on the part of one's fellow-men, including such intangible "gifts" as the dispensing of justice.
34	This passage obviously connects with the last sentence of verse {56} - "Nay, but they do not perceive [their error!''-and. hence, refers to the people spoken of in verse {54} as being "lost in their ignorance" (fi ghamratihim ).
35	Namely, actions and dogmatic assertions which utterly contradict the teachings of the very apostles whom they claim to follow, like ascribing divine qualities to beings other than God, worshipping saints, or rejecting divine revelations which do not accord with their own likes and dislikes or with their customary mode of thinking.
36	See surah {17}, note [22]. The particular reference, in this context, to people "who [at present] are lost in the pursuit of pleasures" contains an allusion to verse {55} above (see my explanation in note [32], especially the last sentence). The "taking to task through suffering" spoken of here may refer to the Day of Judgment or - as in {17:16} - to the inevitable social ruin which, in the long run, wrong beliefs and actions bring with themselves in this world.
37	This is the meaning implied in the auxiliary verb kanat. preceded by the particle qad.
38	Lit., "as one who keeps awake at night" (samiran). In combination with the phrase kuntum...tahjurun, this expression indicates the pursuit of endless, fruitless discussions divorced from all reality, or a mere play with words leading nowhere. (See also {31:6} and the corresponding note [4].)
39	Implying that the message of the Qur'an is but a continuation of all the divine messages ever revealed to man.
40	I.e., they hate to admit the truth: the reason being - as the sequence shows - that the world-view propounded by the Qur'an is not in accord with their own likes and dislikes or preconceived notions.
41	I.e., the reality of all creation.
42	I.e., if the universe - and, especially, human life - had been as devoid of meaning and purpose as they imagine, nothing could have endured, and everything would have long since perished in chaos.
43	For this rendering of the term dhikr, see note [13] on {21:10}.
44	The terms kharj and kharaj which occur in the above verse are more or less synonymous, both of them denoting "recompense". According to Zamakhshari, however, there is a slight difference between these two expressions, kharj being more restricted in its meaning than kharaj: hence, the first has been rendered as "worldly recompense" and the second as "recompense" without any restrictive definition, implying that a recompense from God is unlimited, relating both.
45	Sc., "as it inevitably befalls all human beings": an oblique allusion to the fact that human life is never free from distress.
46	Lit., "We took them to task".
47	Or: "they will despair of all hope".
48	Lit., "and all who are on it".
49	Lit., "who is the Sustainer (rabb) of the seven heavens"- see note [20] on {2:29}- "and the Sustainer of the awesome throne of almightiness": cf. {9:129} as well as note [43] on {7:54}.
50	Sc., “as to deny the prospect of resurrection”.
51	Lit., “they are indeed liars” — i.e., they deceive themselves by asserting that they believe in God and, at the same time, rejecting the idea of a life after death, which — in view of the fact that many wrongdoers prosper in this world while many righteous lead a life of suffering — is insolubly bound up with the concept of divine justice. Apart from this, a denial of the possibility of resurrection implies a doubt as to God’s unlimited power and, thus, of His Godhead in the true sense of this concept. This latter doubt often finds its expression in the mystic belief in a multiplicity of divine powers: and it is to this erroneous belief that the next verse alludes.
52	This allusion to the pre-Islamic Arabian belief in angels as “God’s daughters” and the Christian dogma of Jesus’ “sonship of God” connects with the statement “they are intent on lying [to themselves]”, which has been explained in the preceding note.
53	This is how almost all the classical commentators explain the phrase la-dhahaba bi-ma khalaqa (lit., “would surely have taken away whatever he had created”), implying that in such a hypothetical case each of the gods would have been concerned only with his own sector of creation, thus causing complete confusion in the universe.
54	See note [88] on {6:100}.
55	See surah {6}, note [65].
56	Lit., “to show me” [sc., “in my lifetime”]. According to Zamakhshari, the combination of the conditional particle in (“if”) with ma (“that which” or “whatever”) — spelt and pronounced imma — endows the verb turini (lit., “Thow wilt show me”) with the quality of intrinsic necessity — thus: “If it is inevitable (la budd) that Thou show me [or “let me witness”]...“, etc. In translation, this particular phrasing is best rendered as above, since anything that is God’s will becomes eo ipso inevitable.
57	See surah {13}, note [44]. In the present context, the evil referred to consists - as the next clause shows - in blasphemous attempts at "defining" God (cf. verse {91}); but the ethical principle implied in the above injunction is the same as that expressed in the last clause of {13:22} as well as in {41:34} - namely, that evil must not be countered with another evil but, rather, repelled by an act of goodness.
58	Lit., "of the satans" or "satanic forces": see note [10] on {2:14}.
59	Cf. verses {74} and {90} above, with which the present passage connects.
60	Most of the commentators regard the plural form of address in the verb irji'uni ("let me return") as an expression of reverence. Since, however, the Qur'an offers no other instance of God's being addressed in the plural (in contrast with the frequent use of the plural in His speaking of Himself), Baydawi suggests - on the strength of examples from pre-Islamic poetry - that this plural form of address is equivalent to an emphatic repetition of the singular form irji'ni: hence the repetition of this phrase in my rendering.
61	Lit., "in respect of that which (fi-ma) I have left", comprising both the omission of good and the commission of bad deeds.
62	Lit., “we became people who go astray”. This allegorical “dialogue” is meant to bring out the futile excuse characteristic of so many sinners who attribute their failings to an abstract “bad luck” (which is the meaning of shiqwah in this context); and thus, indirectly, it stresses the element of free will — and, therefore, of responsibility — in man’s actions and behaviour.
63	My interpolation of the word “ignominy” is based on the fact that this concept is inherent in the verb khasa'a (lit., “he drove [someone or something] scornfully away”), and is, therefore, forcefully expressed in the imperative ikhsa'u.
64	Lit., “the best of those [or “of all”] who show mercy”. The same expression is found in the concluding verse of this surah.
65	Lit., “until they made you forget”:i.e.,”your scoffing at them became the cause of your forgetting”.
66	This part of the allegorical “dialogue” between God and the doomed sinners touches (as do several other verses of the Qur’an) upon the illusory, problematical character of “time” as conceived by man, and the comparative irrelevancy of the life of this world within the context of the ultimate — perhaps timeless — reality known only to God. The disappearance, upon resurrection, of man’s earth-bound concept of time is indicated by the helpless answer, "ask those who are able to count time”.
67	Lit., “that you would not be brought back to Us”, i.e., for judgment.
68	See surah {20}, note [99].
69	Lit., “the Sustainer (rabb) of the bountiful throne of almightiness (al-'arsh al-karim)”. See also surah {7}, note [43], for an explanation of my rendering of al-'arsh as “the throne of [His] almightiness”.
